The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Goat-gland Transplantation, by 
Sydney B. Flower and John R. Brinkley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Goat-gland Transplantation
       As Originated and Successfully Performed by J. R. Brinkley,
       M. D., of Milford, Kansas, U. S. A., in Over 600 Operations
       Upon Men and Women

Author: Sydney B. Flower
        John R. Brinkley

Release Date: July 10, 2009 [EBook #29362]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOAT-GLAND TRANSPLANTATION ***




Produced by Louise Hope and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





[Typographical errors, whether corrected or not, are listed at the end
of the e-text. Boldface type is shown with +marks+.

_Historical Note:_ The Milford facility closed in 1930 when Brinkley's
Kansas medical license was revoked. He then moved to south Texas and
established his million-watt Mexican radio station.]




[Illustration: J. R. BRINKLEY, M.D., MILFORD, KANSAS, U.S.A.]




        No. 5 The One-Best-Way Series of
               New Thought Books

                 THE GOAT-GLAND
                TRANSPLANTATION


    As Originated and Successfully Performed
      by J. R. Brinkley, M.D., of Milford,
     Kansas, U.S.A., in Over 600 Operations
               Upon Men and Women


                       By
                SYDNEY B. FLOWER


          New Thought Book Department
            722-732 Sherman Street
                 Chicago, Ill.




  Set Up and Electrotyped
  May, 1921

  Copyright, 1921
  By Sidney B. Flower




TABLE OF CONTENTS


AUTHOR'S PREFACE                                       5

Chapter.                                            Page.

     I. DR. BRINKLEY'S THEORY                         11
    II. THE PRACTICE, MEN                             17
   III. THE PRACTICE, WOMEN                           23
    IV. DR. BRINKLEY'S OWN STORY                      30
     V. A YEAR OF DEVELOPMENT                         42
    VI. THE STORY OF CHANCELLOR TOBIAS                48
   VII. PROFESSOR STEINACH AND THE RAT                60
  VIII. A WEEK AT DR. BRINKLEY'S HOSPITAL             66
    IX. SUMMARY                                       72
     X. "THE SPARK OF LIFE"                           78




AUTHOR'S PREFACE


Though dealing exactly with a surgical subject, this book is a layman's
word to laymen. It is an attempt to say to the general public a few
things about this amazing work of Dr. J. R. Brinkley, of Milford,
Kansas, which he is debarred from saying for himself in this simple
form. He has under consideration a book of his own covering the subject
of Goat-Gland Transplantation, his experiments, successes, failures,
theories, and conclusions, which will probably be issued during the
winter of 1922, and in that book he expects to treat his subject
exhaustively with full medical and surgical detail, in a manner
acceptable to the medical profession. But, in the meantime, no
satisfactory effort has been made to tell the story to the general
public, except in the fragmentary form of occasional newspaper notices.
The author feels that the chief interest in this matter abides with the
patient rather than with the practitioner, or, if not the chief
interest, at least an equal interest. It seems proper, therefore, that
the subject should be briefly dealt with at this time, while it is yet
in its infancy, in such a manner that the general public may grasp the
essentials of what is being done in America in this new application of
endocrinology. Some attention is paid to the pioneer work of Dr. Frank
Lydston of Chicago in the transplanting of human glands into human
beings, but rather by way of emphasizing the fact that Dr. Brinkley,
with the choice of human, monkey, goat, or sheep glands before him,
chose the goat-glands in preference to any other for his field of
experiment and operation, and has never for a moment regretted his
choice, or seen any reason to alter it.

Without any wish to enter upon a controversy, the author is impelled to
take some notice of the statement of Dr. Serge Voronoff of Paris, who,
during his recent visit to the United States, announced that he pinned
his faith almost exclusively to the glands of the anthropoid apes as
most suitable for transplantation into human beings, while he lamented
the natural scarcity of obtainable material. Dr. Voronoff is credited
with having performed over 150 transplantations upon rams, but none
whatever of goat-glands upon human beings, and not more than two or
three of simian glands upon human beings. His statement, therefore, that
successful transplantation of the glands of the goat into a human being
is "impossible, and cannot succeed," is empirical, and entirely
unsupported by any experience of his own in the matter. Against it, and
completely confuting it, we set the clear conclusions of Dr. Brinkley,
backed by his unequalled record of over 600 successful transplants of
goat-glands into men and women, during the past three years. Since there
is no other human being who has had experience sufficient in this matter
upon which he may justly found an opinion, it seems to the author that
only one man, Dr. Brinkley himself, is qualified to speak at all, and
until members of the medical profession here and in Europe have mastered
Dr. Brinkley's technique, and learned what to do, and how and why, and
what not to do, and why not, a dogmatic negative is not the proper
comment with regard to the question of whether successful
transplantation of goat-glands can be made upon human beings. If, after
learning what Dr. Brinkley has learned by laborious experiments,
continued for years, they find that their conclusions differ from his,
they will at least have earned the right to speak. But it is
unreasonable to suppose, in that event, that their conclusions would in
any way or degree differ from Dr. Brinkley's conclusion that, in brief,
the implanting of the glands of the young goat into men and women is an
actual triumph of modern surgery and medical skill, which has resulted,
in hundreds of cases, clearly recorded, and filed for reference, in
rejuvenating both men and women; removing impotence from old men; curing
arterio-sclerosis, or hardening of the arteries, in every case treated;
curing five cases of Dementia Praecox out of a total of five cases
treated; curing six cases of Locomotor Ataxia out of six cases treated;
curing two cases of Paralysis Agitans out of two cases treated;
restoring normal conditions in one hundred cases of Psychopathia
Sexualis; bringing about the parenthood of barren women and impotent men
not yet past middle-age; restoring the function of menstruation or
regular periodicity to women who have passed through the change of life;
and, in a word, making good in the cure of so-called incurables, and
doing something that was never done before, to our knowledge, in the
history of the earth.

It is not the intention in this little book to follow Dr. Brinkley in
exact detail through his amazing list of cases of all manner of diseases
cured by this treatment. His files are open to the profession at all
times, and the records may be consulted by the earnest investigator at
the hospital at Milford, Kansas.

The intention in this little book is to cover particularly that phase of
human longing which asks that the clock be turned back, and that old age
be deferred.

It is a fact beyond all gainsaying that Dr. Brinkley's operation has in
truth cheated old age of its toll in very many cases of both sexes, and
the improvement, or rejuvenation, affects both the minds and bodies of
those treated by this method; and this rejuvenation is lasting to the
extent of the doctor's observation. It would be presuming to say that it
is a permanent improvement. Upon that point no one has any right to
offer an opinion, because there are no facts upon which to found it. But
Dr. Brinkley's earliest cases, operated upon three years ago, up to the
present time have shown no diminution whatever in the good effects
secured. Neither the women nor the men have lost any particle of their
increased vitality during this lapse of time. Who can say how long the
good effects will continue? Dr. Brinkley's opinion is that the
improvement will run for possibly fifteen years, at the end of which
time he expects to re-operate upon any cases that show a slowing-down in
the life-processes, and believes that the introduction of two new glands
after that time will result in a return of the vitality in full force as
before. That is his guess of the probable duration of the improvement,
but it is quite possible that his estimate errs on the side of
conservatism. There is one assuring and comforting fact, however,
bearing on this point, which should be carefully noted here, namely,
when a retransplantation was made by Dr. Brinkley upon a goat which had
first been cured of old age by transplantation of new glands, which was
allowed to retain this new adolescence for a year, and was then deprived
of the glands, causing a speedy return to the miserable condition of old
age and its ills, and which was then re-operated upon and given two new
glands, the instant improvement was every whit as noticeable and as
perfect in this second implantation as in the first. Now it is a
reasonable inference from this clear-cut result that Dr. Brinkley is
right in his opinion that a second transplantation of the goat-glands
into a human being after a lapse of years, when the first implant may be
expected to have worn itself thin, will result in the same improvement
in the physical and mental condition of either man or woman as took
place upon the first implant. This is, in fact, the basis of his theory
that the normal age of man and woman today can be surely extended from
the three score and ten limit to possibly twice that number of years.
You are invited to consider what this discovery of Dr. Brinkley's
operation, for it is no less than a discovery, would have meant to the
world in the prolongation of the lives of those benefactors in all
fields of human endeavor, Literature, Science, Art, etc., if it had been
known and understood when Shakespeare wrote, when Darwin worked, when
Rubens painted, and when Patti sang. It will please your fancy to
picture what might have been, but we have before us the consideration of
what is, and it is more than comforting to know that we shall deal here
with the hard cold facts of what is being done today, and will be done
tomorrow. This is no poet's dream, but the stern reality of a young
surgeon's work in hospital, extending over three memorable years of
achievement in a virgin field. Dr. Brinkley has worked out his problem
alone, save for the devoted aid of his wife, who is also a licensed
physician. He is today a poor man, and expects to remain so, because he
has refused every alluring offer made him looking to the establishment
of this Goat-Gland operation as a commercial proposition on a big scale.
He is governed by his ethical vows, and retains his independence, but
the world would call him a fool for not turning his discovery to his
greatest pecuniary profit. Since he prefers to remain true to his ideals
in this matter it is for us at least to be thankful, and accord him the
recognition to which the scientist is entitled who puts his work above
his profits.

Chicago, April, 1921.




CHAPTER I

DR. BRINKLEY'S THEORY


We are not privileged to be discursive in a little book which seeks to
hit the nail on the head in every paragraph, drive it home in every
page, and clinch it in every chapter, and there would be no excuse,
therefore, for sketching, even in brief outline, the history of the
various attempts that have been made, from Brown-Sequard, with his
Elixir, to Metchnikoff, with his benevolent bacteria of the intestinal
tract, to extract from Life its secret of human longevity. It has been a
long quest, and, in the main, fruitless, though it might be said in
fairness that Brown-Sequard's method of using the expressed testicular
juice as a medicine, by mouth or injection, for the renewal of youth,
was probably the true parent of the present familiar method of using the
extracts of various glands, or the pulverized substance of the glands
themselves, notably the thyroid and the adrenal, as medicines to be
taken internally for the relief of various diseased conditions. The
constant objection to such form of medication is, of course, that when
the medicine is stopped the good results stop, so that a temporary
relief is the utmost that can be hoped for from the method. Genius is
synthetic, elliptic, sudden, but always clear and sure. Dr. Brinkley
began with a theory, and by no means a new theory. From the theory he
deduced rapidly, and acted. The results of the acts proved the truth of
the theory. That theory has been variously stated, its most familiar
form being, "In all living forms the basis of all energy is sex-energy."

Looking about for facts to confirm or disprove this assertion all
investigators have been faced with similar phenomena, such as:

When the male fowl is sterilized in order that he may grow big and fat
for the market later he loses his cock's plumage and gains in weight. In
the psychic domain the changes are still more marked. The capon is a
coward, shunning the contest for supremacy. He does not forage for the
hens, inviting them to feed upon what he has found, but looks after
himself first and last. He is lazy, sluggish, and selfish.

The stallion is a proud and beautiful animal, and Job's description of
the war-horse "He paweth in the valley and rejoiceth in his strength, He
goeth on to meet the armed men!" with its context, is still the best
word-painting we have of the majesty of the horse in full possession of
his sexual powers. The gelding is tractable and useful, and the absence
of the fiery impatience of the stallion fits the gelding for man's use.

When men are castrated, as in the East, in youth, where they are prized
as custodians of the harem, they are fat, usually large of frame, but
short-lived. The growth of hair on the head is often scant; on the face
and body it is altogether missing. The voice is high, partaking of a
treble quality. When through surgical operation or accident it happens
that a man is deprived of the testicular glands in youth, early manhood,
or even middle-age, the same changes follow as in the case of the
eunuch, the hair on face and body disappears, the voice changes from
deep to high tone, and mentally the man develops inertia and cowardice.
Physically, he puts on fat almost immediately.

When women have, for any reason, had their ovaries removed by surgical
operation, marked changes follow, which vary much in detail, but carry
certain general similarities. The face and body age rapidly in
appearance, and there is a slowing up of functions of the organs, with a
tendency to masculinity in tastes, behavior, feelings.

Noting these and many other phenomena, as many had done before him, Dr.
Brinkley concluded that the testes of the male and the ovaries of the
female performed corresponding offices for each sex, generating the
vital fluids which, when not fulfilling their primary object of
reproducing the species, were turned back into the blood and absorbed by
the tissues for the benefit of the individual's physical and mental
processes. Normal activity of the secretions of the sex-glands,
therefore, meant, in Dr. Brinkley's opinion, right nourishment for all
the cells of the body, and right functioning of all the organs of the
body. The strength and speed of the stallion in health were as much due
to the right action of the sex-glands as his full-arched neck, his
blazing eye, or his thick mane and tail. And since the capon and the
eunuch acquired a cowardice that avoided fatigue, effort, or conflict,
it was clear that the mental qualities were as directly influenced by
the testicular secretion as the physical. It followed that the
well-nourished brain, capable of sustained concentration and clear
thinking, must necessarily be the brain that was fed by the normal
activity of the sex-glands, and it also followed that since youth in man
and woman is the time of matured beauty of face and form in man and
woman, when sexual secretions are of normal activity, therefore, the
sexual secretions were mainly responsible for the development of matured
beauty of face and form. From this it was clear and evident that the
haggard face, the lined face, the over-thin or the over-fat body,
phemonena familiar to all of us in men and women who have passed their
youth, were due in the main to lack of nourishment of the body-cells by
the seminal fluid, with lack of proper functioning of the organs, and
resultant lack of proper elimination of waste matter from the system,
producing that condition of slowing-down of the machine which is a part
of the aging process of the body and mind of man and woman, as seen in
all men and all women today.

It is important always that you realize that though we may seem to
stress the physical improvement in human beings brought about by this
gland-transplantation, the more important change of the two is the
mental, and Dr. Brinkley's theory that ALL ENERGY IS SEX-ENERGY means
exactly that the powerful brain equally with the beautiful face owes its
strength and vigor exactly to the right functioning of the sex-glands.

We must not be accused here of running to extravagance. It is not stated
that all human brains are of equal power or can be developed to equal
power. It is stated that all human brains of unusual power are brains
that are well-nourished by the testicular secretions, and it is implied,
with full understanding of what this statement leads to, that if, for
any reason, there is an interference with this sex-gland activity, the
unusual brain will cease in a short time to be unusual in its power,
grasp, and faculty of clear, continuous thought. Similarly it is stated
that if this unusual brain, after losing its power of sustained
thinking, is again fed by the renewed activities of the sex-glands, it
will re-establish its power, and the mind will display its former
brilliance.

You see how amazing and far-reaching is the application of this
apparently simple theory that sex-energy is the basis of all human
energy.

It is, after all, only another way of saying that all things proceed
from a common source, that Life is One, that Mind and Body derive from
the same source, that energy is so much an integral of matter, that in
the final analysis matter is only static energy; since the atom is made
of molecules, and molecules of electrons, and electrons of electricity,
or energy.

In saying, therefore, that sex-energy is at the basis of all human
energy we may quite possibly be trending towards a solution of the
world-old question of what Life itself is. Some day, without a doubt, we
shall surprise this secret at its source. At present we are fortunate to
have discovered, through Dr. Brinkley's careful proving of his theory,
that human energy, no matter whether its manifestation be physical or
mental, has a common base of supply, the sex-glands, and that their
activity determines a brilliant mentality, or a dull brain; a state of
health, or a state of disease; beauty of form and feature and skin, or
wrinkles, sallowness and ugliness. These appearances and qualities are
phenomena which have the same source, or base. Many have felt this to be
true. Dr. Brinkley alone has had the wit and skill to find the means to
solve the problem as it should be solved to be of any value to humanity,
namely, to discover how the inactivity can be changed to activity, how
the blood of man and woman can be charged anew with the life-giving
hormones, perhaps, or whatever may be the name of that substance
secreted by the sex-glands and used by the blood to nourish all the
cells of the body, which MUST be present in the system if body and mind
are to continue to function at their best.

[Illustration: DR. AND MRS. BRINKLEY]




CHAPTER II

THE PRACTICE. MEN


Dr. Brinkley began his experiments in gland-transplanting upon animals
in the year 1911, three years before the European War, using goats,
sheep, and guinea-pigs as his subjects. He ran beyond the limits of his
resources in this experimental work on animals, which was interrupted by
his enlistment in the army, and assignment to service as First
Lieutenant in the Medical Corps. Passed fit for Foreign Duty he was
nevertheless unable to get across to France, and remained, like many
another good surgeon, on duty in various southern camps.

Returning to civilian life he took up his quest again, varying a general
medical and surgical practice by continued observation and experiment in
gland-transplantations upon animals, leaning ever more strongly towards
the exclusive use of goats. About this time he heard of the work of
Professor Steinach of Vienna in grafting the glands of rats, and
producing changes in the character and appearance of the animals by
inverting the process of nature and transplanting male glands into
females, and vice versa, sometimes with success. He had followed with
the greatest interest also the experiments of Dr. Frank Lydston of
Chicago, who performed his first human-gland transplantation upon
himself, an example of courage that falls not far short of heroism. But
Dr. Brinkley was never favorably impressed with the idea of using the
glands of a human being for the renovation of the life-force of another
human being. He was looking to the young of the animal kingdom to
furnish him with the material he proposed to use to improve the
functioning of human organs, and more certainly as time passed he drew
to the conclusion that in the goat, and in the goat alone, was to be
found that gland-tissue which, because of its rapid maturity, potency,
and freedom from those diseases to which humanity is liable, was most
sure under right conditions of implantation to feed, nourish, grow into
and become a part of, human gland-tissue.

Later we will dwell a little upon some of his results. It is worthy of
note in passing that his first experiment upon a human being was an
unqualified success. He transplanted the goat-glands into a farmer who
was forty-six years of age, happily married, but childless, and one year
after the transplantation a child was born, who was christened "Billy"
in honor of the circumstances responsible for his birth. By patient
selection Dr. Brinkley has found that the Toggenburg breed of Swiss goat
gives him the best possible stock to use in his gland-work. This choice
was forced upon him by results obtained by the use of other breeds. He
found that the Toggenburg goat gave him best results because the animal,
besides its sound health, carries none of that persistent odor which is
peculiar to male goats the world over, and which, if shed abroad by a
human being would make his neighborhood unpleasant. He found that the
best age of the male goats whose glands were to be transplanted was from
three weeks to a month. He found that the best age at which to use the
ovaries of the female goat was one year, because, unlike its youthful
brother, the female goat's sex-activities are not developed before that
age.

His method of transplanting the glands into a man is by making two
incisions in the man's scrotum under simple local anesthesia,
a practically painless operation, but from this point on the technique
varies according to the conditions presented by the case. No two cases
are exactly alike, and Dr. Brinkley performs no two operations exactly
alike. That is the reason, he explains, why, with the best will in the
world to teach his fellow-practitioners what to do and how to do it, he
is nevertheless unable to state in writing exactly what treatment to use
to cover all cases. It cannot be taught by correspondence, and, simple
though it sounds to hear it, it cannot be learned by attendance at a few
clinics. It is delicate in this sense, that if it is not rightly
performed in the individual case the glands will slough. That means loss
of time, loss of temper, and the waste of a perfectly good pair of young
goat-glands. Another very important thing which his experiments have
taught Dr. Brinkley is this: the glands on being removed from the goat
must immediately be placed in a salt solution warmed to blood-heat, and
they must be used on the human being WITHIN TWENTY MINUTES from the time
they are taken from the goat. No such thing is possible as keeping these
glands in the refrigerator for twenty-four hours, or anything of that
kind, before using. The more quickly after removal from the animal they
are used the more likely they are to take hold and grow. In his men
cases he uses sometimes one gland, sometimes two; sometimes the whole
gland, just as it came from the young goat, sometimes a part of the
gland only, but he leans to the opinion that the gland of the
three-weeks-old goat gives best results if used entire, without
trimming. Sometimes he lays the gland +upon+ the outside of the human
testis, connecting part with part; sometimes he opens the testis by
incision and lays the goat-gland within the cleft. Very often there are
adhesions which must be broken down before the goat-gland can function
rightly. Very often there are unsuspected hydroceles, forming cysts in
the testicular mass, which must be cut out, or there may be varicocele
requiring attention. The patient suffers very slight inconvenience; the
local anesthetic is enough to dull the pain even of the breaking down of
the adhesions, so that it is at its worst no more than the pain of a
toothache, and lasts a very brief while. Many of the patients converse
with the doctor while the operation is proceeding. The pain is
negligible. The doctor proceeds according to the condition, age, etc.,
of his patient. He may ligate, that is to say, tie off, the tubes that
connect with one testis, or the other, or both; he may not ligate at
all. It will depend upon the result sought, the condition present, and
the age of the patient. Suppose the patient is an old man in whom it is
desired to produce rejuvenation; the doctor then will ligate both sides,
in order that the new glands when they take hold, and begin to feed the
testes of the man, stimulating these to a new activity, may not be
overtaxed to the point of excess usage by the patient when he returns
home and finds himself in possession of a sexual vigor that has been
unknown to him for many years. This increase in sexual vigor
+invariably+ follows, regardless of the age of the patient. The glowing
letters on file in the doctor's office attest this. Here, for instance,
is a letter from a man eighty-one years of age, who says, "I feel like a
boy of eighteen. This is something I have not known for more than forty
years. The goat-glands have certainly done the work for me, but I wish,
doctor, you would fix it so that I could complete the sexual act," etc.,
etc.

But this completion of the sexual act is exactly the thing that is to be
avoided in the case of these old men. Remember the theory in the last
chapter, "All animal energy is sex-energy." The conversion of this
sex-energy into other forms of energy, physical and mental, is the aim,
and this aim would be frustrated if these old men were given full power
to do as they pleased with their new-found youthful vigor. You cannot
always trust them. That is the purpose of the ligating of both sides,
making the emission of the semen impossible. The life-force, then,
having no other outlet, can do nothing else but reinvigorate the entire
system by pouring its precious fluids into the blood.

Suppose, now, the case is that of a man of fifty who is physically run
down, married, and anxious to be the father of a child. In such a case,
if the man is physically sound, Dr. Brinkley will do one of two things.
After the transplantation of the new glands he will either ligate one
side permanently, and allow one testis to carry on the work of
rejuvenation while the other can be used for procreation, or he will
ligate both sides and say to the man, "I am tying off both testes
because you will need to rebuild for at least one year before you should
think of becoming a father. But I am ligating with linen thread, which
does not dissolve, and if you come back to me in one year from now I
will remove the ligatures, one or both, and you will then be able to
procreate." This is reasonable and wise talk, and the man makes no
objection. When the year of probation, as you might call it, has
expired, the man returns to the hospital, the ligature is removed, and
he goes home in a couple of days. These things are not fairy-tales, but
solid facts, amazing as they sound to you. There are five goat-gland
babies today among Dr. Brinkley's patients that he knows of, four boys
and one girl. There are probably many more of whom he has heard nothing,
for patients have a way of moving out of touch after awhile.




CHAPTER III

THE PRACTICE. WOMEN


At Dr. Brinkley's hospital, a beautifully appointed private residence,
it is a comfort to women patients to have the doctor's wife, herself a
competent surgeon if necessary, at hand during the actual operation.
Mrs. Brinkley administers the local anesthetic, or the general
anesthetic, if that is called for, as it sometimes is. While
the bulk of the operations performed on both men and women are
gland-transplantations, a diseased condition of tubes and ovaries has
sometimes made a laporotomy necessary, and many major operations have
been successfully performed in the white-enameled operating room.
At such times a woman clings to the presence of a woman, and Mrs.
Brinkley's kind and pleasant manner is usually sufficient to banish all
nervousness from the woman patient.

In ordinary cases of gland-transplantation into women, where the patient
is in good physical condition, with no disease of the organs, the
operation is as simple as in the case of the man. The speculum discloses
the condition of the vagina, and the insertion of the new ovary is into
the mucous membrane of the vagina, leaving the goat-ovary about four
inches distant from the woman's. The only incision made is a small one,
about one inch long, painless under local anesthetic, the purpose of the
incision being to get a blood supply for the goat-ovary. Sometimes one
ovary is implanted, sometimes two; invariably the new ovary is trimmed
to a reduction in size. Invariably it is implanted within twenty minutes
of its removal from the nanny-goat. Unfortunately for the goat, the
removal of her ovaries usually costs her her life. She mopes for a few
days, refuses to eat, and dies. She is always given a general
anesthetic, and the removal is painless at least, if fatal. Pursuing the
conclusions drawn from his long experience, Dr. Brinkley has found that
women derive more instant benefit from the glands than men with respect
to their awakened enthusiasm, improved appearance, and recovery of the
feeling of poise and well-being. Very noticeable is the change of figure
which follows the implanting of the new ovaries in the case of a fat
woman. The change is equally marked in the case of a fat man. A man of
abnormal weight, 250 lbs., lost fifty pounds in two weeks following the
operation, during which time he remained at the hospital, feeling well
and strong, but shrinking in girth amazingly. When he left the hospital
his clothes hung about him in bags and folds. The fat woman's spirits
seem to rise as her weight decreases, and she feels as if she had indeed
regained the buoyancy of her youth.

Dr. Brinkley by no means asserts that the woman whose ovaries have been
removed by surgical operation will grow two new ovaries after the
transplantation has been made, but he cites the case of a woman whose
ovaries had been removed by surgical operation some years previous, the
uterus remaining intact, in whom he implanted two goat-ovaries, and
whose periods shortly afterwards returned on a four-day basis, with
twenty-eight-day interval. He does not say that the goat-ovaries
transplanted into the woman have grown new ovaries, but there remains
the phenomenon of the renewed menstruation, and this is very difficult
to account for. In barren women, from twenty-eight to thirty-five years
of age, in whom he has found not a diseased, but an atrophied, condition
of the ovaries, the transplantation has invariably been attended with
success to the removal of the barrenness, the new glands evidently
bringing about the development of ova. Nor does Dr. Brinkley say that in
the case of a man who has had both glands removed by surgical operation,
the transplantation will produce new glands for the man, and yet he has
had two successes to offset several failures in this very result,
without any clue to why the success followed in the one case and not in
the other. The work is yet in its infancy stage, and Dr. Brinkley is the
first to admit that there is far more about it to be known than he has
yet succeeded in knowing. He is averse to experimenting upon women
patients at this stage of his knowledge, and has many times refused to
transplant the glands for women who have requested him to perform the
operation for them. One such case was at the hospital during the
writer's visit there in April. She was a paralysis case, quite fat,
unable to walk except by putting forward one foot at a time, supported
by the arm of someone on each side of her. She was driven to the
hospital in an automobile, accompanied by her husband and daughter, from
the farm--two hundred miles away! Dr. Brinkley strongly urged her not to
have the gland operation performed at all, but she insisted upon giving
it a trial. It is too soon yet to speak of results in this case, but in
Dr. Brinkley's view it is asking too much of the glands to expect them
to produce favorable results in a case of this severity. Yet, at this
time, there was in the hospital a young woman suffering from Dementia
Praecox, whose mother had been watching over her for twelve years, and
on whom the affliction of her daughter had so weighed that she told the
writer she wished God would take one or the other of them, because it
was more than she could bear. This young woman had been confined in the
State Hospital for the Insane, and had been treated by specialists for
many years, without any benefit at all. There was some homicidal mania,
much depression, and attempts at suicide. She could not be left alone in
her room for a moment. But the day after the transplantation of the
glands this young woman embraced her mother, and talked so rationally to
her that she called in Dr. Brinkley, and with tears repeated what her
daughter had just said. Dr. Brinkley advised her that the results were
altogether too sudden to build upon. "There will certainly be ups and
downs yet," he said. "You must expect good days and bad days, when you
will doubt if your daughter is any better. But, to make a normal
recovery, she +ought+ to show an alternation of good and bad days, with
the good days gradually drawing ahead and becoming more frequent and
more marked. I look for her to recover entirely in a year's time, but
she will always retain her sensitiveness and a certain amount of
hysteria, so that things that would not bother you or me will hurt her
grievously. You must be prepared to expect this to happen. But I see no
reason at all why she should not in the near future become a happy wife
and mother." The blessings of this good mother were a reward in
themselves, and were so received by the doctor and his wife. When such
results as this are obtained it becomes very difficult to draw a line
and say, "The goat-glands will do no good here." Physicians of the best
standing had said to this poor mother before she took her daughter to
Kansas, "So you're determined to try the goat-glands? You are wasting
your time and money. Brinkley is nothing but a fake. If there were any
help for your daughter we could cure her. We can do nothing. There is no
help for her!" This was repeated to the writer by the mother, and he
vouches for its truth. Is it not evident that a better understanding of
the goat-gland operation is highly desirable among physicians and
surgeons today?

Quite a frequent style of inquiry from women to the doctor runs like
this: "I am in good health, and in every way normal; age 35. I want to
remain as I am, and grow no older in appearance than I am today. Do you
think that the goat-gland operation would keep me from getting any
older?" To this kind of inquiry Dr. Brinkley makes a stereotyped reply,
something as follows: "If you are today in good health I should not
advise the goat-gland operation, but would advise it in your case as
soon as you have passed the change of life, in ten or fifteen years from
now." To the writer he said, "I cannot conscientiously advise this woman
to submit to this operation, because I don't know that the glands would
advantage her in any way. They might, or they might not. I don't know.
It is therefore experimental work, and I cannot take her money for an
experiment. I must have something definite in the way of experience to
go upon. There must be some evident condition of ill-health to be set
right. But, on the other hand, though I will not advise these people to
take the gland operation, there may be something in her idea that the
glands will arrest age and hold it back. I have never been in a position
where I could afford to experiment on young and healthy human beings,
and this point can only be settled by such experiment upon healthy and
young human beings. I should say at a guess that the operation would do
her no good, but you understand that this is a guess only. I do not know
anything about it. All such things as this we shall learn by degrees by
further experiment. At present I am kept busy attending to cases of real
sickness, or defined conditions of arrest of function, where I have
experience to guide me in saying that the gland-operation will be of
benefit, but, if I could afford to perform a few of these experimental
operations for nothing, at no cost to the patient, I should be glad of
the chance. There is so much yet to be learned in this work."




CHAPTER IV

DR. BRINKLEY'S OWN STORY


The +New York American+, issue of March 14, 1920, carried the following
articles:

  +GOAT GLANDS SUCCESSFUL+

  +Head of Hospital Tells of the Curing of Sterility
  by the New Discovery and of Control of Sex
  Through Simple Operation--Disease
  and Insanity Also Banished.+

  +By Dr. W. H. Ballou+

Dr. J. R. Brinkley, head of the Brinkley-Jones Hospital and Training
School for Nurses at Milford, Kansas, has now furnished to the
scientific world what are termed "ample proof cases" that by
implantation of the fresh interstitial glands of the goat sterile people
may bear children of either sex desired. Already the town is filling up
with childless people waiting to be operated upon. Incidentally, cases
of insanity are cured within thirty-six hours after a simple operation.
Other diseases also disappear. Milford is a small town 150 miles west of
Kansas City. Here Dr. Brinkley has performed more than 100 major
operations, and more than 300 minor operations, each one a success;
cured more than 1,000 cases of Influenza, without losing a case; and
cured one "hopeless" case of sleeping-sickness.

The practice of Dr. Brinkley accords with the investigations of glands
by Professor Arthur Keith, president of the Anthropological Section of
the British Association for the Advancement of Science. Professor Keith
states: "The interstitial gland has as much to do with the growth, in
certain particulars, as the pituitary gland has in general bodily
growth. All of the changes we see in children after they begin to grow,
which bring to prominence racial characteristics, depend upon the action
of the interstitial gland. If the gland is removed, or remains in
abeyance, the maturing of the body is prolonged or altered. Sex
differences, the more robust manifestations of males, are more emphatic
in the white than in either the black or yellow race. This is shown in
the beardless face and almost hairless body of Mongols and Negroes, and
especially in Nilotic tribes of Negroes with long, stork-like legs,
which is a manifestation of abeyance of the interstitial gland. As she
grows aged, and her sexual condition closes, woman assumes the coarser
and more masculine appearance, due to the loss of functioning of this
gland. It is the prime factor in differentiating the races of mankind."

Kingsley affirms, in "Comparative Morphology of Vertebrates" that
"interstitial cells carries secretions in man which pass into the blood.
They apparently cause secondary male characters such as, among other
things, hair on the face and change of voice at the close of boyhood.
They govern most female characteristics."

We are on the eve of a tremendous revolution, which must cause a drastic
revision of all works on zoology, anatomy, genetics, physiology, and
evolution in general. The enormous investigations of glands and their
secretions have sprung up and focused since the middle of the World War
period. These investigations are rapidly resulting in a new surgery and
a new practice of medicine.


  +Discoverer of New Method of Rejuvenation
  Tells History+

  By Dr. J. R. Brinkley

My first operation was upon a husband in a childless family, forty-six
years old, and married for sixteen years. His wife was forty-two years
old. I transplanted in him the interstitial gland of a male goat. His
health improved almost at once, and he thereafter looked and acted like
a man many years younger. Within a year he was the father of a fine baby
boy. The father continues to retain his improved vitality. The boy was
named "Billy" in honor of the goat.

Next a young woman came to me for the operation. I found her glands
diseased, removed them, and replaced them with the interstitial glands
of a male goat. Her recovery was speedy. A year later she gave birth to
a strong boy baby, now four months old. These were but the beginnings.
Other women desired female offspring and have received the glands of the
female goat. There are now some twenty-five cases in the hospital at
Milford receiving goat-glands.

[Illustration: THE DEMENTIA PRAECOX CASE, AND MISS LEWIS HEAD NURSE]

+Insanity Is Cured.+ In the hospital is a man who came from New York
City recently and received two male goat-glands upon his arrival. During
his past he had been in three New York Insane Asylums, and had gone to
the Mayo and other institutions. Nothing had been accomplished for his
case, and he had been told finally that he was incurable and must remain
a mental defective. He had decided to commit suicide if I failed to
remedy his condition. In thirty-six hours after the insertion of
goat-glands his temperature had risen to above 103 degrees, but became
normal twenty-four hours later, and has since remained so. His mind has
gradually cleared, he looks and feels younger, and is contemplating
marriage. The hideous dreams and nightmares which had destroyed his
sleep and rest for many past years have left him, and he now eats and
sleeps well. Apparently the cure is complete.

A case of Dementia Praecox, violent in character, was brought to me as a
result of the cure in the above case. Restraint was necessary, even to
the strapping of his hands, feet and body to the bed. He was in all
respects a typical insane asylum case, destined to remain under
restraint. The second day after two male goat glands had been inserted
he spoke to me, saying, "Doctor, won't you please remove the straps so I
can rest comfortably? I am perfectly aware of everything now and feel as
if snatched from the grave." We removed his shackles and on the
following day he called for books to read. He made a beautiful
convalescence and a perfect recovery. He is now with his wife and
children at home, transacting his business as a normal and sane man.
Since 90 per cent of insanity cases and 75 per cent of divorce cases are
due to diseased glands, I may be pardoned for holding out hope to a
vast, hopeless class, numbered at over 3,000,000 Americans.

+Sterility Is Banished.+ As a rule the women who come to me for
treatment prefer to bear male children. In such cases it is essential
that they should receive the interstitial glands of the male goat. We
have in hospital at the moment, however, a childless married woman of
twenty-eight, who wishes devoutly for a female child. We found her
sterile of a natural gland and inserted the gland of a female goat. Her
transformation has been remarkable, and I am confident her first child
will be a girl.

You naturally ask about the future, which can only be premised. Women
who have received male goat-glands will continue to bear male children,
if any; those that receive the female goat glands will continue to bear
girl babies. The future carries a promise of much information to be
gleaned along this line. I cannot say what would happen if the husband
were to receive male goat glands and the wife female goat glands. Their
progeny might or might not be mixed. We will try it on any sterile
couple that desires, knowing positively that normal children of one or
both sexes will result.

Where substitution of glands of any character is essential, they should
be taken from the goat operated upon immediately before the human
implanting, and be inserted at once. Glands should not be taken from the
ape or other animal for human use. The goat is immune to tuberculosis,
He is a clean animal, full of health and vitality. Apes are very subject
to tuberculosis. One can never tell whether an ape is diseaseless or
not. It is generally unlawful to substitute our human glands, and, even
though they could be readily obtained, they are apt to be infected with
some disease.

The essential element of foods is the vitamin, a nitrogenous substance
of indeterminate nature. Without it we would starve, though eating
plenty of proteins, carbo-hydrates, fats, salts and water. Nothing will
sustain life if the vitamins are absent from the diet. Goat's milk
contains these important substances in greater abundance than any other
animal food.

+The Goat Reacts Like Human.+ The goat alone among mammals reacts to
poisons almost identically as human beings react, and the poison gases
of the war had precisely the same effect upon him as upon the soldiers.
So 1,500 goats did their bit in the war in an experimental way. These
points in his favor, and other similarities to man, are the reasons
which led me to select the goat as the best possible material in this
work. Goat-glands alone seemed to be harmonious and sympathetic when
transplanted into the human body. In other words, the hormones of goat
and man agree.

We still know less about the causes of hormones than the effects. On
account of the mutual tolerance of goat and human hormones the goat
gland speedily attaches a blood supply in the human body, and cell by
cell is replaced so that it soon functions as the original gland would
had it been present and normal. The new gland is also exceptional in
that it does not have to be placed near or at the location of the proper
human gland. It can be inserted in any place where it is not liable to
injury, even in the hip in men.[*]

It should be noted that I do not claim to make old men young again, or
that I have discovered the secret fountain of youth. I am engaged in the
practical work of giving health, normality and progeny to men and women
who have been cheated out of their natural heritage. I have named the
process "re-creative gland operation" in accordance with the belief now
general among genetists and anatomists that if the clock of time is ever
to be turned back for humanity it can only be through glandular
transplantations. Glands have proved much superior to any animal extract
or serum in this class of cases. Often in serums the poison elements are
retained, but not the nutritive. We use the whole goat gland, as a rule,
because we do not know in what part of it the hormones hide. The
attempted transplantations of kidneys have thus far failed because the
kidney product is waste matter, not live cells as in the case of the
interstitial glands.

    [Footnote: Author's Note.--The date of this interview is more than
    one year old, March, 1920. Today Dr. Brinkley implants the male
    glands by incision in the acrotum of the man, and in no other
    place whatever, having found this method of operation the most
    sure in results. Today he uses only the male goat-glands for the
    man, and only the female goat's ovaries for the woman.]


  (From The Chicago Tribune, of date February 1, 1920.)

  +GOAT GLANDS GIVE BABIES TO CHILDLESS.+

  +Woman and Three Men Become Parents After
  Transplantation.+

Milford, Kansas.--A surgeon in this little Kansas town has lifted from
womanhood the curse of sterility.

He is Dr. J. R. Brinkley, chief surgeon of the Brinkley-Jones Hospital
of Milford.

For several years Dr. Brinkley has made a study of the transplantation
of the interstitial glands and its results. Two years ago he performed
his first operation upon a human being. Since then he has circumvented
nature four times, making it possible for three men and one woman to
become parents. He is awaiting results hopefully in four other cases.

The most remarkable case is that of the woman. She is a young married
woman of Milford, who had been married several years and had despaired
of bearing children. About a year and a half ago she heard of Dr.
Brinkley and his success with interstitial gland operations. She went to
him and asked him if he could cure her sterility. Dr. Brinkley made no
promises--he never does. But he told her the operation was a simple one,
and that it would improve her health, even if it failed to give her a
child. She gladly submitted to the operation.

Dr. Brinkley removed an interstitial gland from a live male goat. He
made a slight incision in the woman's abdomen, inserted the gland and
stitched it in. In a week the patient was about her household duties
again. Six months ago she gave birth to a healthy baby. It was a boy.
The mother was the happiest woman in Kansas.

The surgeon had treated six other cases similarly, but all were men--men
who loved children and yearned for parenthood. Three of the men are now
fathers of healthy children.

In each case Dr. Brinkley had used male goat glands--and all the babies
were boys.

Then this occurred to him:--

"If I transplant female goat glands maybe the babies will be girls!" He
decided to try it, and two months ago his opportunity arrived. A woman
came to him just as his first woman patient had come. She was 28 years
old, had been married six years, and was childless. Dr. Brinkley
performed the operation, using the glands of a female goat. He is now
awaiting results. "I do not say this woman will have a girl baby," said
Dr. Brinkley today, "but I am experimenting. It may be merely a
coincidence that all the babies so far have been boys. So far as I know,
I am the first surgeon to experiment with gland implantation in women.
I am also the first to use goat glands in preference to others.

"Unquestionably I have cured sterility in one woman, and I have utmost
faith that it can be cured in any other, so long as all of her organs
are not missing. The operation is a little more difficult than it is in
the case of men, but no more serious. Where a man recovers, and can get
about, in two or three days, a woman recovers in a week.

"All of my patients are much improved in their general health as a
result of the operation. I wouldn't say that this operation holds the
secret of eternal youth. I don't know. All my patients have been between
the ages of 32 and 48, so that I cannot speak from experience.
I believe, however, that the operation will prolong life; I know that it
improves the health in every way. But I cannot say that it will restore
the bloom of youth to an old man's cheek. I am considering, however, an
operation upon a man 80 years old who came to me and asked for the
operation. Whether he would be able to have children as a result of it I
do not know."

None of Dr. Brinkley's patients had been parents until they came to him.
Now the oldest of the babies is 13 months; another is 8 months and a
third is 6. Dr. Brinkley does not claim to be a specialist in gland
implantation; he is merely a practicing surgeon who has made a study of
the subject and is doing what he can to help unfortunate people. The
doctor's modesty until now has hidden his remarkable discovery from the
world, but he is now writing a report on his results.


  (From the San Diego, Cal., +Union+, of date,
  February 7, 1920.)

Scientists who formerly ignored Dr. Brinkley's letters are now writing
to him asking him for exhaustive reports of his work. The sarcastic
attitude came largely heretofore from those who were unwilling to
believe that such operations of the highest scientific importance, were
being performed in an out of the way village that couldn't be found on a
railway map.

Dr. Brinkley, who was graduated from the Medical Department of Loyola
University, and who has traveled over all the world, explained his
residence in Milford. After leaving the army he sought a location in a
small town, selecting Milford as the result of a newspaper
advertisement, and going there, found it to consist of less than 200
inhabitants. But the surrounding territory was rich and the farmers
prosperous, and in the isolated location he saw the chance of continuing
experiments begun at Bellevue Hospital, New York. Later he found himself
compelled to build his own hospital to care for the patients that
arrived, attracted by the news of the goat-gland operations. Dr.
Brinkley is 35 years old and has been a skilled surgeon for more than 15
years. He is a member of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, the American Medical Association, the Missouri Valley Medical
Association, the Kansas Medical Association, and a Fellow of the
Clinical Congress of Internal Medicine. He is also a 32nd Degree Mason.

In the treatment of pneumonia and influenza Dr. Brinkley uses serums of
his own invention. In the treatment of his cases of influenza last year
the reports of the health authorities of Geary County, Kansas, show that
Dr. Brinkley didn't lose a single case. Milford is in Geary County, and
Geary County swears by Dr. Brinkley.




CHAPTER V

A YEAR OF DEVELOPMENT


The intention in offering for your perusal the preceding newspaper
accounts of Dr. Brinkley's work in the opening months of the year 1920
was to show you what his views at that time were regarding the value of
the gland operation which he has since made his life-work. The Chicago
Tribune speaks of it as incidental to his general work as a surgeon. Dr.
Brinkley himself speaks of shortly beginning an experiment upon an old
man of 80. A year later he looked back upon a record of achievement of
the most astounding results in operations performed upon men of 75, 80,
and even 81. During this past year he has perfected his technique,
implants the male glands exclusively into men and the female glands or
ovaries into women, and has definitely selected the scrotum of the man
as the only right place in which to introduce the goat-glands for the
transplantation. You are here viewing the development of a great
scientific discovery from the beginning of its employment upon human
beings. Nor is there any reason to suppose that the year 1922 will
produce no embellishment of value in the form of a wider application of
the method. Some very striking limitations have been established during
the past year's work. For instance:

If the blood examination shows a positive Wasserman test for syphilis it
is useless to transplant the glands, because they will certainly slough
out. Active syphilis is antagonistic to the goat-tissue. Even latent
syphilis, showing a negative Wasserman, is likely to produce a slough of
the glands. Nothing should be concealed from the doctor, of course, and
yet it has happened at the hospital at Milford that a patient on being
questioned in advance of the operation has emphatically stated that he
had never contracted syphilis, and three days later, after the
transplantation, when the sloughing of the new glands had shown
something definitely wrong with the blood, this patient admitted that he
had not spoken the truth in the matter, but had contracted the disease
many years previously. On the other hand, in Locomoter Ataxia, in which
there is invariably a history of syphilis, the goat-glands take hold
without exception, the efficacy of the transplantation in this disease,
hitherto incurable by any means known to man, being due to the power of
the new glands to cause a dissolving of scar-tissue, in the opinion of
Dr. Abrams of San Francisco, who investigated the remarkable results
attained by Dr. Brinkley in his cures of Locomoter Ataxia by the
goat-gland operation.

If the goat-glands are transplanted into members of the Hebrew race
there follows invariably a high temperature persisting for several days,
after which the cure proceeds normally without any untoward occurrence.
Glands transplanted into a negro will slough, or, at least, they did so
in the one case on which Dr. Brinkley performed the operation, for no
apparent reason other than a supposed racial antagonism to goat-tissue.
No experiments have yet been conducted upon Japanese, Chinese, Hindus,
or our native Indians. When the blood count shows high in white
(leucocytes) and low in red, the glands will slough, but the reverse
condition does not hold true. And now let us consider the case of Mr.
Ernst, of Morganville, Kansas, who is over 77 years of age, and who
permits the use of his name and address. One of the most curious
features of his case is that when he came for the operation his hair,
white as snow, was thin on the scalp, the color of the skin of the scalp
showing through the hair, as it frequently does in the aged. That was
almost a year ago. Mr. Ernst's hair is now turning black all over the
head, the scalp shows a thickening in the growth, or an increase in the
quantity of hair, and you cannot now see the scalp through the hair. Mr.
Ernst wrote an excellent letter to Dr. Brinkley two months ago, and
states that he has no objection at all to its reproduction. When a
personal story of this kind is offered for use it is as well to use it
in its original form, but this so rarely happens in this work that for
its uniqueness alone it would be worth while to put it before you. With
some notable exceptions, the men patients who have been operated upon by
Dr. Brinkley feel ashamed of the fact. Not for anything would they let
their friends or acquaintances know anything about it. The veil of
secrecy is, of course, never lifted by the doctor. The women patients
have none of this false shame, apparently, but enjoy discussing the
results of the operation with their friends. It is, perhaps, natural
that a United States Senator, two of whom have been operated on with
much advantage to themselves, should shrink from the jocose remarks of
friend or foe and the curiosity of acquaintances. There is good reason,
in the case of a public man, for avoidance of notice in the matter, and
that is one of the advantages of having the hospital located in the tiny
village of Milford. If freedom from observation is the wish it is
certainly gratified there. Agreeing, therefore, on the whole, with the
reticence of the public man in this matter, we yet feel a certain
satisfaction in the robust avowals of Mr. Ernst. Follows his letter of
January, 1921:

"I am 77 years old, employed as commercial salesman by one of the
largest manufacturing companies of its kind in the world, and command a
good salary and the confidence of my employers. Since my operation at
Dr. Brinkley's hospital I am now their free lance salesman, opening up
new territory and making good money. Any doubting Thomas may send me a
self-addressed envelope if he questions the genuineness of what I say
here about myself, and I will take time to answer him. First, the
operation is absolutely painless. For a number of years I was a martyr
to Sciatica and Muscular Rheumatism. I used every Patent Medicine I
could hear of, besides Osteopathy and Chiropractic, and innumerable
prescriptions from physicians, and received no benefit at all. The
sciatic trouble was bad enough, but to this you must add loss of memory,
hydrocele, kidney trouble, constipation, no appetite, and insomnia. Most
nights two hours sleep was the most I could get, for the pains were
incessant. I read in ... the +Kansas City Post+ last Spring about Dr.
Brinkley's Goat-Gland operation, and decided to try it right away. I was
in such misery I would have tried +anything+. Now I want to tell you, in
the fewest words, that the amazing truth is that I have not had a twinge
of pain of any kind at all since the operation, and have only a memory
of my former suffering. This is a marvelous thing. I have the feeling of
a youth. Whenever you want to hear from me I will write again and tell
you what changes have taken place in me as the result of this operation.
If I was asked to put a cash value upon the operation in my own case I
could not do it, but I can say that all I possess in cash would be a
poor equivalent for the difference the operation has made in my life.
What is the difference in cash value between a life that is worth living
and one that is constant misery? I don't know how you would fix that
value, but that is the difference the operation has made in me.

  S. H. ERNST."

Dr. Brinkley has kept in close touch with Mr. Ernst, and received other
letters, not for publication, in which the old gentleman went frankly
into details of the change that had been wrought in him by the operation
in the matter of astonishing sexual vigor. For obvious reasons such
details, while of the greatest scientific interest, cannot be more than
hinted at in a book, and we must content ourselves with the acceptance
of the fact as a fact of interest to science, to Dr. Brinkley, to the
world of aged men at our doors, and to Mr. Ernst particularly, rejoicing
in his new-found vigor.

Apart from the genuinely happy tone of his letters to Dr. Brinkley, the
phenomenon of the darkening of the hair strikes most sharply on the
attention. Perhaps our satisfaction in this particular piece of evidence
of rejuvenation is due to the fact that it is an objective proof;
something visible to the eye, tangible; something for which we are not
required to take anybody's opinion, but can trust our eyesight for the
fact of it. It is something in which the psychic factor, the feelings,
the imagination, the auto-suggestion, does not enter at all, and that is
why it is exceedingly well worthy of note. Looking back over the years,
and casting up in your minds all the people of sixty and seventy years
of age whom you have known, can you put your finger on a single one
whose hair turned in color from white to dark and at the same time from
thin to thick? You probably cannot. Nor can the writer. It is reasonable
to conclude, therefore, that the goat-glands alone have done this thing
in the case of Mr. Ernst.




CHAPTER VI

THE STORY OF CHANCELLOR TOBIAS


We must go to the pages of +The Chicago Evening American+ of date August
18, 1920, for the story of Chancellor Tobias, written by Lloyd Lehrbas,
of the American staff, with a brief introductory note, as follows:

(Here is one of the most remarkable news stories ever published in any
Chicago newspaper. So startling is its detail that +The Chicago Evening
American+ in the interest of absolute accuracy submitted it to the
person most concerned for his approval, so there can be no question
concerning the facts, scientific or otherwise. Other men and women
involved are not mentioned because the facts being established in the
most important case, it is not considered necessary.)

Goat interstitial gland operations have been successfully performed on
J. J. Tobias, Chancellor of the Chicago Law School, and thirty-five
other Chicago men and women by Dr. J. R. Brinkley, of Milford, Kansas,
who has been in Chicago for the past six weeks, performing the
operations every day.

[Illustration: THE BRINKLEY HOSPITAL, MILFORD, KANSAS, U.S.A.]

An alderman, a well-known political figure, living on the Gold Coast,
a judge, a prominent real estate man, a newspaper man, three women, one
of whom is well known on the North Shore, and other Chicagoans, have
found the lost Fountain of Youth as a result of the miracle-surgeon's
transplanting the revivifying interstitial glands of a goat into their
human bodies.

The story of Dr. Brinkley's knife magic is the story of a surgeon's
study and experimenting for nine years, ending with the successful
accomplishment of the gland operation performed on thirty-six
Chicagoans, who are alive and healthy today.

The complete story, with laboratory data, the name of one of the
prominent patients, and an authorized interview with Dr. Brinkley is
told for the first time in +The Evening American+ today.

+Successful on Women.+ Proof that the operation has been successful on
women as well as men makes the story of increased interest. Until now it
has been the general conception that the operation was successful on men
only. A Chicago woman is now supremely happy because, after years of
hoping, the operation has made it possible for her to become a mother.

Five months ago, Chancellor Tobias was, in his own words, played out.
His years of teaching in the Chicago Law School had reduced his
vitality.

Chancellor Tobias went to Dr. Brinkley's hospital and submitted to the
operation in order to relieve arterial congestion in the brain, caused
by two attacks of influenza, a year apart. So serious had become his
condition and so severe the attacks of vertigo and high blood pressure,
that his attending physician informed him he was in imminent danger of
death. The planting of the interstitial glands in Chancellor Tobias'
body relieved the congestion and fully eliminated the cause.

+Purged of All Ills.+ Today he has dropped the years from his shoulders,
purged his body and brain of ills, and stands revivified.

"I feel like a youth again," the aged chancellor said today. "I'm a new
man."

The stories of the other Chicagoans who have been benefited by the
operation read like fiction. They were ill, they were old, they
apparently were beyond the skill of the surgeon's knife, or spiritual
hope. Now from their own lips come paeans of glorification for restored
vitality and youth, all due to the humble goat and the surgical skill of
a country surgeon.

+Tobias' Own Story.+ Today I called at the law school in the Monadnock
Building to see Chancellor Tobias and get the story from his own lips.
The reports seemed too rosy. The facts seemed overstated. The results
appeared to me unduly magnified. But here was a prominent lawyer who had
the operation performed. Here was assurance there would be no buncombe
from him.

An alert, peppy, gray-haired man sprang up to greet me, his eyes, the
eyes of youth, his step firm and sprightly, his handclasp steady and
strong. And yet he was 71 years old!

"Do you really feel younger?"

+Twenty-five Years Younger.+ Chancellor Tobias threw out his chest,
squared his shoulders,--and smiled. "I feel twenty-five years younger.
I'm a new man, strong, and good for twenty years of work," he replied.
"I was ill, old, and played out, but the operation has completely
revivified me."

"How does it feel to have been old, and then become young again?"

"Glorious!"

+Was "Played Out."+ And here is Chancellor Tobias' story of the fountain
of youth.

"After teaching for twenty-five years in the Chicago Law School," he
said. "I was played out. I suffered intense headaches. My eyesight began
failing. There was a constant ringing in my ears. Dizziness came with
increasing regularity. Mentally and physically I was an old man. Then I
heard of Dr. Brinkley."

Chancellor Tobias went to Milford, Kansas, as a last hope in March of
this year.

On March 26 Dr. Brinkley selected a two months' old goat and removed the
interstitial glands. They were placed in a solution at body heat and
taken to the operating room. Dr. Tobias was given an anesthetic. Dr.
Brinkley leaned over the operating table, made a quick, accurate
incision, planted the goat gland, and fifteen minutes later the
operation was over.

+Eyesight Improves.+ "Four days after the operation," the Chancellor
continued, "the headaches had disappeared, and my eyesight was greatly
improved. And seven days afterwards, I left the hospital a new man."

One month after the operation Chancellor Tobias wrote to Dr. Brinkley:
"I really feel twenty years younger. My health has improved wonderfully.
I have regained my lost vigor and vitality. I'm a recreated youth."

And today even Chancellor Tobias' fellow faculty members, many of them
nationally famous attorneys, admit that Dr. Tobias has improved 100 per
cent.

+"Almost Unbelievable."+ "I hesitate to speak of this," Chancellor
Tobias said. "It is so wonderful it is almost unbelievable. The public
cannot appreciate what the operation means. There has been some levity
over the news of the gland operations, but it should be treated with the
greatest respect and admiration. The operation has been a success on me
so I am in a position to speak authoritatively. It is one of the
greatest things of the century."

Among the other thirty-five patients who have been successfully operated
on are many well-known to thousands of people in Chicago. Here are some
typical Chicago cases omitting names:

Policeman ----, aged 60, suffering from chronic diabetes and a general
breakdown, which was about to compel his retirement from the force.
Operated on August 9. Left the hospital yesterday feeling like "a new
man."

Alderman ----, aged 55, chronic asthma sufferer. Operated on April 26.
Asthma had disappeared by the time he left the hospital. Declared he
felt years younger and is now completely revivified.

Mr. G----, newspaperman, aged 39. Suffered from complete nervous
breakdown from overwork. Operated on April 25. Resumed work almost
immediately, full of pep, and today is the picture of health.

Judge ----, aged 58. Premature old age from hardening of the arteries.
Operated on April 28. Because of his wonderful improvement in health has
changed his mind about retiring from the bench.

+Operation Painless.+ "Ignorance about the gland transplanting is almost
universal," I told Dr. Brinkley. "I know nothing of it. Tell me how it
is done, why you use goat-glands, all the whys and wherefores, so the
readers of +The American+ will have some authentic information. Is the
operation painful?"

"No," Dr. Brinkley replied. "It is a simple incision with very little
actual pain. In practically all cases a local anesthetic is used.
A general anesthetic is used only in exceptional cases."

"How long does the operation take?"

"Fifteen to twenty minutes. It is as simple as grafting new shoots on a
fruit tree. No part of the human gland is removed. The goat-gland is
simply planted to take the place of the old gland."

"And the hospital confinement?"

"One week, to rest the patient and allow the gland to begin functioning
without undue exertion."

"Any danger?"

"None whatever. It's like grafting on a piece of skin. There is
absolutely no danger."

+Eliminates Disorders.+ Lost youth is regained, according to Dr.
Brinkley, as a result of the revivifying fluid secreted by the
transplanted gland, leading to the elimination of organic disorders that
are hastening old age.

Dr. Brinkley explained in detail:

"I began my experiments nine years ago, and began using goat-glands
three years ago in the interstitial gland operation because the
goat-glands resemble to a large degree the human glands in their
histological make-up. The interstitial glands and the blood, of a goat,
are a very close approach in their constituents to those of a human
being.

"Old people are simply broken down. The goat-gland secretes the fluid
that builds up the brokendown parts of the human body. Eyesight improves
50 per cent. If a man is underweight he will gain to normal, and if he
is overweight he will reduce to normal, showing that the goat glands
actually function."

+Chronic Diseases Cured.+ "Chronic skin diseases are cleared up. Stomach
trouble disappears under the new gland's guardianship of the body.
I have the laboratory data, the scientific records, and the actual
revivified patients to prove it. The only unsuccessful cases are certain
people whose blood lacks necessary essentials, and they are few."

Dr. Brinkley gives Dr. G. Frank Lydston of Chicago credit for performing
the first gland transplanting operations.

+Lydston Is Pioneer.+ "Dr. Lydston is the pioneer," Dr. Brinkley said.
"He was the first man to transplant glands from a human to a human.
I have never transplanted anthropoid ape glands, as Dr. Voronoff of
Paris, and only in three cases human glands, as Dr. Lydston, and I was
not pleased with the results in those three cases. I was the first to
transplant goat glands. Dr. Serge Voronoff has performed the operation
on only two human beings. He failed to give Dr. Lydston credit, although
it is obvious he followed Dr. Lydston's book."

   *   *   *   *

This completes Mr. Lehrbas' interview. In the same paper, +The Chicago
Evening American+, a month later, date of September 15, appeared the
following account of another visit to Chancellor Tobias, written by
Edward M. Thierry:

J. J. Tobias, chancellor of the Chicago Law School, told me it was none
of my business how old he is. He's got a goat-gland sewed into his
innards and I was trying to get some personal Ponce de Leon statistics.

"I'm over 50," Tobias conceded. "How much I won't say. But I will say my
clock has been turned back from ten to twenty years! Just look at me!"

He jumped out of his chair--er--friskily. That's the only expressive
word. Tobias is little, thin and wiry. His face wrinkles up and his
teeth flash when he smiles. He has grey hair and talks with quick
jerks--as if his energy is running a race with his tongue.

"I'm rejuvenated," Tobias said. "Time will tell whether my goat-gland
will make me live longer. I had that operation on last March 26, and I'm
still living. I'm no decrepit old man, either."

Tobias was operated on by Dr. J. R. Brinkley, who has caused a furor in
medical circles through his many successful goat-gland operations.

Critics of Dr. Brinkley make Tobias tired. Get his goat, so to speak. He
says he knows what he's talking about, for he was formerly lecturer in a
Chicago medical college.

"Seventy-five years ago my father had a little German machine," Tobias
said, "called the 'life waker.' It was a disk as big as a dollar with a
lot of needles in it. You jabbed it into the small of the back and waked
life that way. We can laugh at that archaic system, for it was crude.
Now we're more scientific. Witness the transplantation of goat-glands."

Tobias said he went to see Dr. Brinkley at Milford, Kansas, to
investigate his goat-gland discovery because of long suffering from
congestion of the brain arteries. Doctors had told him he was in danger
of death because of severe attacks of vertigo and a high blood pressure.

"The operation," Tobias said, "occupied about 20 minutes. Within three
hours after the operation the goat-gland began to function, the
congestion was relieved, and within three days the cause was eliminated.

"I am a new man physically, with new mental vigor, and a new power of
sustained effort. I can distinctly sense the function of a new gland in
my body."

It must have functioned muscularly, for when I left Tobias gave me a
knuckle-crushing grip which made it necessary to write this story with
my left hand.


These newspaper articles are printed here without change, in spite of
evident repetitions, because of their evidential value. It is an old
trick of the public press in the United States, and probably in Europe
also, to start a sensation with a blazing front page story, and in the
course of a few weeks follow it with a complete and sarcastic expose of
the whole matter as a baseless fabrication, piling facts on facts to
show that the first story was an ingenious piece of deception got up by
the subject with the purpose of making capital out of the credulity of
the public. There are no better detectives in the world than newspaper
men. They work for the love of it. An expose is dearer to the
detective-instinct in them than a laudatory article, and they leave no
stone unturned to get at the facts. When, therefore, after the lapse of
months, the newspapers of the United States repeat and confirm their
first stories about Dr. Brinkley's work it means something to one who
knows their methods of working. Money cannot buy this sort of publicity.
There must be facts, and facts of value, and facts verified again and
again, before stories of this kind appear and reappear in the great
organs of publicity in all the big cities of the United States. How far
they carry, and how wide-reaching is the interest, will be understood by
the statement that the announcement of Dr. Brinkley's work, printed
first in American newspapers, and copied in the English papers, has
brought him urgent requests to visit South Africa, Australia, Sweden,
Scotland, and many other countries. From England in particular come
requests from women that he do not fail to make a journey to some part
of Europe in the summer of 1921, in order that they may take the
operation with a view to bearing children. This he has arranged to do
about June of this year, expecting to find in England a climate during
the months of June, July and August, which will not be too hot to
prevent him from transplanting the goat-glands. He does not operate at
his hospital in Kansas during June, July and August, on account of the
heat, having found that when the outdoor temperature is high the glands
will certainly slough. The high temperature without seems to create a
high temperature for the patient, and the result is a wasted pair of
good goat glands, with loss of time and money to all concerned. In
England in the summer it should be necessary to wait a few days only for
right climatic conditions to present themselves, and be sure that they
will do so. There are the further matters of a supply of goats of the
right Toggenburg breed, a place to keep them, in close proximity to the
operating hospital, and the hospital itself, to be dealt with suitably
in the shortest possible space of time after arrival. The supply of
goats can probably be best procured direct from Switzerland through some
London importer, and the other matters will no doubt fall easily into
place. The goats must not come from a high altitude, or their glands
will not contain a right amount of iodine. This is curiously important.
Dr. Brinkley cannot use goats from Colorado for that reason. If the
doctor's reception in England is cordial he will probably make his visit
there an annual summer affair of three months' duration for some years
to come, which would give him an opportunity of keeping in continued
touch with his English and European patients. The English are a
practical people, and less sensitive than we to, or more careless of,
ridicule, and they are likely to grasp the importance of Dr. Brinkley's
work on the instant of his arrival, compelling a long visit.




CHAPTER VII

PROFESSOR STEINACH AND THE RAT


Writing with vivacity and humor, Mr. Clarence Day, Jr., speculates with
so much whimsicality upon the possible effects of surgical rejuvenation
of men that one might overlook the keenness of his observation in a
hurried perusal of his article. For the sake of preserving it for more
leisurely study, and because the points raised are really worthy of
attention, the article is reproduced here in full, with acknowledgments
to +The Literary Review+, in which it first appeared, of date November
20, 1920. Says Mr. Day:

Biologists really seem to be discovering ways of making men young again.
So far, it is like making men drunk; the state that is produced does not
last. But it looks as though they might succeed in adding a chapter to
life. I wish it could be added to the other end: to youth instead of to
the last flickers. But if we can renew and re-live middle-age, that will
be better still.

A man named Steinach, in Vienna, has been experimenting for ten years
with rats. Full accounts of his work were published last summer in the
great biological journal founded by Roux, and these were summarized and
discussed by the London +Athenaeum+, which is now the most interesting
of all English weeklies. It is from the +Athenaeum's+ account that I am
taking these facts.

Steinach has been studying the interstitial cells that fill in the
spaces between the tubules of the testes, in males, and between the
follicles of the ovaries in females. His reason for choosing these cells
for his experiments is that they are a well-spring of life. Furthermore,
since all our vital functions are interrelated, to make these cells
active gives the whole organism new life and strength. This is not the
only way of stimulating the organism, but it seems the most powerful.

An old rat is like a senile old man; he is bald and emaciated, his eyes
are clouded, his breathing is labored. He stays in one place, with bent
back, and has small interest in anything. If you cut one of his genital
ducts, however, which is a comparatively slight operation, it has the
effect of making the interstitial cells multiply actively. Waves of life
flood his being. Within a few weeks he is transformed. These currents
restore and rebuild him; skin, muscle and mind. Both in looks and
behavior he is indistinguishable from other strong rats.

He has cast off old age. Senility, which sets in with men when they are
from sixty to eighty years old, begins after twenty to thirty months in
a rat. He is then about through. But when an operation is performed on a
senile rat he gets from six to eight months' new life. In other words,
the addition to his normal span is 20 to 30 per cent. That would be a
large fraction of life for a man to live over again. The rat lives it
vigorously, eagerly, back in his prime.

When senility again comes upon him it is in a modified form. His
organism as a whole is in better shape. It is his mind now that tires.
As Steinach has already cut one or both of his genital ducts, that
method of stimulating his cells cannot, of course, be repeated. But
another operation is ready. Some unfortunate young male is deprived of
his testes by Steinach, and these are implanted forthwith in this hoary
old rat.

A second spell of active life follows, not so long as the first. It ends
in acute psychic senility. The rat goes all to pieces. It is as if the
brain, twice restimulated to emotion, curiosity, keenness, had
approached the very limit of its running, and was completely exhausted.

Steinach has not yet tried whether a third rejuvenation is possible.
That remains to be seen. He lives in Vienna, and everything there has
come to a stop. He has no assistants, no funds, with which to conduct
further experiments. "May happier lands or cities carry the work on," he
writes at the end.

It seems as though some rich American ought to stake the old boy.

   *   *   *   *

Steinach has naturally found it more difficult to give new youth to
females. But here, too, he has in a measure succeeded. X-ray treatment
and ovarian transplantation are the methods employed.

As to human experiments, there is a colleague of Steinach's named
Lichtenstern, who has operated on numerous men and women with apparent
success. There has not been time yet to measure how long their new lease
of life is to be; but they have regained the joy of life they had
lost--strength and powers of work. Still, all this needs confirming.

In a rat it is the sexual impulses that are directly reanimated. He
again knows the fevers of courtship, the conflicts of marriage; and
whether he is glad to repeat these commotions depends on the rat. In
man, however, the sexual impulses are more or less sublimated, so that
the new energy may appear in any of the other forms of psychic activity.
Whatever such faculties he has in him once more grow strong.

   *   *   *   *

How wonderful it would be if we could at least prolong certain
lives--great writers like H. G. Wells and Conrad, great artists, great
doctors. But in practice, the men who would get hold of this would be
John D. Rockefeller and W. J. Bryan. The rich uncle would walk in and
tell his hopeless heirs he had been to see Steinach. Senators would live
forever. The world would grow harder for youth.

Even were we able to control all this, and reserve the boon for the
best, would it work? Say we did choose the right men--is it not too
intimate a suggestion that we should set a man of science upon them,
prepared with a little knife to slice one of their genital ducts? Men
have fought all these years for the right to live. Have they no right to
die? Must an old man who is needed by the public be condemned to live
on, his aged cells stirred and restirred while we glean his brains bare?
Some Socrates of the future may yet envy that other his hemlock.

   *   *   *   *

This, we say it regretfully, is the end of Mr. Day's article. It is
admirable fooling. We will not pay his wit the poor compliment of taking
him seriously at the last and pointing out to him that it was Heine who
said, "Nobody loves life like an old man!" There will be no need of
insistence to urge the old men, useful or useless, to submit to an
operation to renew their youth. But it is to be hoped that they will
never be asked to submit to the cutting of the genital duct. It seems to
the writer that +The Athenaeum+ must have misconstrued Dr. Steinach's
experiments in some degree, inasmuch as it is difficult to conceive of
the operation of severing a genital duct as conducive to cell-formation.
However, probably ligating is meant instead of severing. But this is not
the point really brought out by Mr. Day's clever article. The real point
is, Is it likely that if Mr. John Jones takes Dr. Brinkley's goat-gland
operation for the renewal of his youth, and thereby adds thirty years to
his life, and at the end of this thirty years of friskiness undergoes a
second transplantation of glands, thereby gaining twenty years more, and
at the end of this twenty years takes the operation a third time,
securing a further lease of gaiety for ten years, will the final years
of Mr. John Jones be years of acute psychic senility, as observed by Dr.
Steinach in his rat? To the writer it seems a +non sequitur+. The cases
are not parallel. The rejuvenated rat appears to regard his acquired
vitality as impelling toward revelry and excess. It is necessary to
emphasize the point that the pith and marrow of Dr. Brinkley's discovery
is that since it is clearly shown that rejuvenation is accomplished by
the restoration of activity to the sex-glands, therefore the
preservation of this rejuvenation MUST depend upon the CONSERVATION of
the seminal fluids, and cannot depend upon any other single factor
whatever. It has been already explained that Dr. Brinkley puts it out of
the power of the rejuvenated man to destroy the good that has come into
his life, and protects him against the danger of yielding too freely to
passionate impulse, by preventing the escape of the rejuvenating agent.
The means of nourishing the body and brain being therefore insured as to
supply, it is not reasonable to suppose that the nerve-cells of the
rejuvenated man can fail to receive their proper nourishment for many
succeeding years, and, passing by the rat as a fallacious parallel, we
cannot see any good reason why the human body and brain, either under
the guidance of self-control, or surgically safeguarded against the
waste of excess, should not function at their best for fifty years of
added life, with very possibly another fifty added to that. The real
crux of the matter is the resistive quality of tissue, which is
approximately 200 years for such organs as kidneys and heart, and, say,
150 for nerve-substance.

[Illustration: THE OPERATING ROOM AT THE BRINKLEY HOSPITAL]




CHAPTER VIII

A WEEK AT DR. BRINKLEY'S HOSPITAL


The writer, approaching the age of 54, and finding himself in
first-class physical and mental condition, except for a high blood
pressure, which was certainly the prelude to a later arterio-sclerosis,
decided that he would be doing himself a service, and put himself in a
better position to write with some authority upon the effects of the
goat-glands, if he took the operation.

On Saturday, April 16. 1921, Dr. Brinkley operated on him at the
hospital, Milford, Kansas, transplanting the glands of a three-weeks old
male goat. He remained in bed Saturday and Sunday, got up and went for
an auto drive on Monday, and passed an uneventful week at the hospital,
returning to Chicago on Saturday. He experienced a marked increase in
mental energy, which might have shown itself also as increased physical
energy if it had been put to the test. This feeling of added pep, snap,
energy, or what you please to call it, could be psychological in its
origin if it were not for the fact that it is continuous, with no
set-backs. Every student of psychology is aware that auto-suggestion has
the power to bring out latent energy, raise the drooping spirits, and
generate a feeling of well-being. But the student, if he is a reasonably
close observer, is also aware that these improved states of feeling have
an annoying habit of being offset by corresponding periods of
depression, and though he may persist in his effort to lift himself out
of the black moods with such success that he finally arrives at a higher
tone-level mentally, with a corresponding physical improvement, there is
indubitably a strong sense of effort needed for this good result. When,
therefore, the writer finds himself working long hours day after day
with no sense of mental fatigue, but a certain unusual gaiety of heart
accompanying the successive days, as if life were on the whole rather a
lark, he, being accurately introspective, and not easily deceived into
optimistic conclusions, is forced to give the whole credit for this
change of spirit to the functioning of the new glands, and he is
confirmed in this conclusion by the fact that the high blood pressure,
which was noticeable enough before the operation, cannot now, ten days
after the operation, be detected by him at all. Ten days is all too
short a time in which to write of details in a matter of this
importance. He expects to be able to confirm improvement in eyesight by
the middle of May, and will be in a position to speak at greater length
on the matter after the summer has passed. The intent of this chapter is
to give a brief account of something he saw at Dr. Brinkley's hospital
during the week of his treatment.

Two weeks before his arrival a man suffering from locomotor ataxia had
been carried in, unable to help himself at all. When the writer saw this
man and talked with him he was up and dressed and walking about, without
a cane, and he left for home after a total stay of something less than
three weeks. In parting from him the doctor said, "You are on the
high-road to complete recovery. I expect to hear that you are getting
stronger every day. Practice in walking will bring back to you the old
confidence and banish the helpless feeling that you are sure to fall.
You see that you can control the motions of your feet and legs now as
you could not before. Sensation has returned to the soles of your feet,
and you can now turn yourself over in bed, which you could not do before
without assistance. This means that the brain, spinal cord, muscles and
will are co-ordinating again. This means that the goat-glands are
actively working, dissolving scar-tissue, and bringing you back to
health. But it is asking a good deal of a pair of goat-glands to do as
much as they must do in your case to bring about complete recovery.
I would rather give them some extra assistance. If you will come back to
me, therefore, next Fall, to this hospital, I will put two new
goat-glands into you; and I believe that with this extra help you will
go right through to a complete cure without any trouble. The operation
will not cost you a cent. I am anxious only to complete the good work.
I may be wrong at that, and it is possible that the glands you have now
will be enough to do the work, but if they do not, come back here for
two more next Fall. Don't forget."

This man had been everywhere for relief, and had taken every treatment
known for his disease, with no results whatever, as he told the writer.
"This is the first time for twelve years," he said, "that I have had any
feeling in my feet. I am surely going to get well at last."

In another case of the same disease the patient, when he came to the
hospital, was taking morphine daily to relieve the lightning-pains. He
could not stand upright with his eyes shut without falling, and if
spoken to suddenly was likely to lose his balance and fall. He had not
walked without a cane for several years. Twenty-four hours after the
goat-gland operation he said that the pains had left him, and
voluntarily stopped the morphine. In two weeks he was walking five miles
before breakfast, without a cane to help him. He left the hospital a
cured man. There has never been a case of true locomotor ataxia cured by
any means whatever, in the history of man, until this Kansas surgeon,
Dr. Brinkley, found the cure for it in this transplantation of
goat-glands. Ataxia is an after-math of syphilis, in ninety-nine cases
out of a hundred, and it is a question, which no layman can solve,
whether the cause of the ataxia is in the disease, or in the mercurial
treatment used to combat the disease. Another age, following this, may
decide that the disease, syphilis, is less destructive of human tissue
than the cure, Mercury. However that may be, the fact remains that
goat-glands will cure Locomotor Ataxia, and they are apparently the only
means of cure hitherto discovered.

The writer talked with some of the townspeople of Milford regarding Dr.
Brinkley's work. Their attitude was detached, but on the whole
affirmative. They could not, as they put it, doubt their own eyesight,
implying that they would do so if they could. They had seen case after
case carried into the hospital, and they had seen those same people walk
out and go their way to their homes. It was queer, they said, and wagged
a critical head. So true is it in all parts of the earth that a prophet
hath honor save in his own country! Here and there, however, the writer
found a townsman who had nothing but words of praise and admiration for
Dr. Brinkley's work. These always proved to be people who had had some
relative under Dr. Brinkley's care at the hospital, and they were
intelligent men who could give their reasons for their conclusions. They
were proud of the lustre which Dr. Brinkley's Goat-Gland work was
shedding upon the name of their village. Most of the townspeople,
however, seemed to think that Dr. Brinkley should be proud of the town.
Their engaging surliness of demeanor with regard to the miracles being
performed in their village was a fascinating study to a city man, who
saw here at its best the typical small-town attitude towards the big
local thing. It is not peculiar to Milford. It is universal. It is as
true in England and France and Belgium and Germany as in any little town
in the United States. What do you suppose the country villagers thought
of Fabre, the great French naturalist, probably to be hailed by the next
generation as the greatest figure since Darwin? Without doubt they
thought him mad, and if kindly, pitied him, or if savage, despised him.
Meanwhile it is quite certain that the work of Dr. Brinkley has put the
town of Milford, Kansas, on the map, and, if you do not find it on the
railroad map you may some day consult, it will help a little to say here
that you go from Kansas City, Missouri, by the Union Pacific Railroad to
Junction City, Kansas, and from that point change to a little branch
line which carries you to Milford. The depot at Milford is about a mile
from the village itself. You will find an auto at the depot which will
carry you to the hospital, where you will be met by Dr. or Mrs.
Brinkley, or Miss Lewis, the Head Nurse, and where you will be very
comfortable if you decide to make a stay of a week or so for personal
reasons. The food is good, and the Kansas air fresh and bracing and
plentiful. Winds are indeed common, but the village is safely out of the
track of the Kansas cyclones, and the storm cellar is unknown. The
hospital is spotlessly clean and a marvel of completeness in equipment.
The preparations for the gland transplantation are simple but thorough;
a test of spermatic fluid, a blood test, a test for blood pressure,
a blood count, and a purgative the night before the operation, with no
breakfast on the morning of the operation. You will eat a good lunch in
bed, however, on that day, and miss no meals afterwards. Briefly, the
writer can say honestly that the pain of the operation is no more than
the twinge of a toothache.




CHAPTER IX

SUMMARY


Dr. Brinkley's employment of the goat-glands for the past three years of
continuous operating, therefore, has proved to his satisfaction and to
that of his patients that the testes in men and the ovaries in women
furnish a secretion which has the property of a revivifying fluid when
restored to the system by the currents of blood and lymph. In that
commonly fatal condition of the arteries which follows rapidly upon the
state of blood pressure known as hardening of the arteries, or
arterio-sclerosis, a practically incurable condition hitherto, the
results obtained by the goat-gland transplantation are miraculously
swift. When the arteries are, as the doctor puts it, "as hard as
pipe-stems," they grow in a few weeks, sometimes in a week, soft and
pliable. The change, according to Dr. Brinkley, is brought about in the
walls of the arteries themselves, and is not a process of dissolving the
accumulations or deposits of calcareous material within the arteries.
The change is in the material of the walls of the arteries, producing a
return of the condition of elasticity, permitting expansion and
contraction as in youth.

It is a favorite theory with some modern writers that the physical
change from youth to age is accompanied in the body, and in a sense
caused by, the deterioration in the quality of the cells of the body,
and they call this change a breaking-down process by which the finer and
more highly differentiated cells, such, for example, as the nerve-cells,
and others which have high and complicated duties to perform, are
displaced by cells of an inferior type, which they name conjunctive
cells, much as the common sparrow drives away the songbirds from the
home garden and, usurping the place of the songbird, substitutes a
wretched twitter for the golden notes of the warblers which once
delighted our ears. The common cells, also, on usurping the place of the
nobler cells, are unable to perform the difficult duties of the latter,
and the result upon human organism is disorder, decay, disease, etc.,
contributing to, if not causing, the condition of old age. This is an
ingenious but not convincing theory. Our knowledge of histological
processes is too incomplete at this stage to permit its acceptance as
fact. It assumes too much to be known which is quite unknown. Moreover,
it refutes itself upon examination in this particular, and in several
others, that if it were true that these inferior cells are on the
lookout to invade instantly any part of the human organism in which
there was a breaking down of nerve-tissue, for example, then it would be
impossible to build new nerve-tissue to take the place of that which was
destroyed, because its place, according to this theory, has been already
taken by an intruder who cannot be dislodged. But new nerve-cells are
constantly being rebuilt, and constantly being put to use in the
organism. If this theory were true, then a brain in middle age would be
unable to function because of the impossibility of renewing its cells.

A much more reasonable and probably true explanation of the cause of old
age is the gradual disappearance of animal matter in the bones and
tissues, and the corresponding increase of the mineral matter in the
bones and tissues, amounting to ossification of cartilage, whereby the
supple cartilage, losing its animal content, becomes practically bone by
deposit of lime particles. This would also account in a common-sense
manner for the fragility of the bones of the aged, the brittleness being
due to calcareous deposits in the substance of the bone itself, in
excess of the normal mineral contents of the bones in youth. The
function of the seminal fluids, therefore, appears to be to restore to
the aging tissues this property, this animal matter, which when in its
right ratio and proportion in the cells of the organism produces the
condition of youth. The action of these seminal fluids, therefore, seems
to be two-fold, a dissolving and a nourishing. The distinction should be
clearly made that the action is NOT merely stimulating. The stimulation
of a nerve-cell is a temporary excitement. We speak of the stimulation
of alcohol, and this illustration gives a clearer view of the difference
between the nourishing action of the seminal fluids and a stimulating
action than we could obtain by the employment of many words. It is
interesting to remember that while it is possible to increase the
mineral particles of soda, potash, lime, iron, silica and magnesia in
the blood and lymph, it is practically impossible for us to increase the
animal contents of the cells by any method of medication or dieting
known to us. Only Life can produce this change in the cells, and only
this method of gland-transplantation has furnished a means of impressing
Life into service to work for us in this matter. To produce the effects
which are needed to rejuvenate a body that has increased its mineral
matter at the expense of its animal matter we require the co-operation
of glands made active, because only the glands, in the marvelous
chemistry of the body, are able to compound the animal substances
required to nourish the cells, tissues and organs of the body, and to
dissolve and remove those injurious substances of a mineral nature which
have accumulated in excess in cells and tissues, usurping the place of
the animal matter in the cells because of the inactivity of function
generally, and the poor elimination of waste matter, as the years pass.
This is the re-creative and rejuvenating work of the gland secretions.
It is beyond us to say exactly what these secretions consist of. We know
the importance of their presence in blood and lymph only by the
disasters that follow their absence. The thyroid gland and parathyroids,
for instance, seem to be connected by some close sympathy with the
activity or non-activity of the interstitial glands, and the atrophy of
one is often accompanied by the atrophy of the other. The subject is
still hidden in darkness to the extent of insufficient knowledge on our
part of the exact constituents of the active agents in the secretions of
the testes, thyroids, suprarenals, pituitary and other glands. Time and
further opportunity for experiment are needed to show to what extent the
goat-gland transplantation can be used to remedy goitre, epilepsy and
the graver lesions of paralysis. The use of the goat-glands is too
recent to admit of anything but speculation on these points. There would
seem to be no good reason to doubt that if the male organs of a young
goat do rejuvenate the atrophied testes of a man, which Dr. Brinkley has
abundantly proved they do, the thyroid gland of a young goat might be
expected to restore the atrophied thyroid of a human being. This again
is only conjecture, Dr. Brinkley's work up to the present having been
confined to the transplantation of testes and ovaries. But he expects to
find time during the present year to satisfy himself of the results of
such important experimental work as is here indicated. It is possible
that his visit to Europe this summer may be the means of enlarging his
field considerably, although it would appear that if he had six pairs of
hands and could keep all employed in continuous service he could
scarcely cope with the demands upon his time which any and all countries
of the earth may be expected to make when his work is known. In ten
years, no doubt, gland-transplantation, particularly goat-gland
transplantation, for the renewal of youth in man and woman will be so
usual as to occasion neither wonder nor hilarity. But we are not living
ten years from now, but at this present moment, and Dr. Brinkley's
operation to-day is a marvel, a wonder and a joy. There is a
satisfaction in being in the van. It is fine to be the first to do a big
thing, especially if that big thing is something of the most practical
value to humanity. Mankind has always crowned its great generals, its
great destroyers of life. Here is a man who comes forward to preserve
life. That is his mission, if you like. Certainly it is his life work.
It is a noble work. The question in the writer's mind is, What will they
do to him? How will they take him in England? Will they applaud, or
crucify, or neglect? Probably they will show him something of the
generous hospitality of England, and leaven this with a plentiful
sprinkling of ridicule, because the subject of the goat lends itself to
humor of the obvious kind. But it is our belief that the hard, practical
common sense of the Anglo-Saxon will lead them to make the utmost use of
this opportunity of his visit, and, having got him, it is to be expected
that they will know enough to keep him. This is quite as much their
opportunity as his. While they sharpen their wit upon the sacrificial
goat and make merry, they are pretty sure to make full use of his
knowledge and skill while they have him with them, and might make things
so pleasant for him that he might say, when the summer is over and he
looks back upon the white cliffs of Dover, returning to his own country,
"This is a good land. I have enjoyed the trip. I like the people. I will
return next summer, and for many summers thereafter."




CHAPTER X

THE SPARK OF LIFE

  +By J. R. Brinkley, M.D., C.M., Ph.D., Sc.D.+

  Chief Surgeon, Brinkley-Jones Hospital and Training School
  for Nurses, Milford, Kansas


  (Written October, 1920)

For many years scientists have believed that a part, or all of the
glands of the human body influenced longevity. They believed our glands
contained the "life spark." Men for hundreds of years have been seeking
the "fountain of youth." Ponce de Leon when he landed in Florida and saw
the beautiful springs and flowers thought he had found it, and so
announced to the world. Long ago we learned that the pituitary gland
influenced growth and development. For instance if the pituitary gland
over-functioned we had Giantism. If it under-functioned the opposite was
the result--a dwarf. If the thyroid gland was at fault we would have
either the low mentality commonly spoken of as cretinism, or myxedema.
We found that by feeding children the fresh gland substance a marked
improvement would be obtained and sometimes a cure. Some years ago there
was a surgical craze which called for the removal of the women's
ovaries. It was thought that many nervous troubles, including epilepsy,
etc., were due to diseased ovaries, so the surgeons removed ovaries just
about as promiscuously as tonsils and teeth are now taken out. After a
while they found a woman without ovaries was about ruined, so something
had to be done, and ovarian extracts and substances were fed to the
unfortunates. Good results were obtained so long as the feeding process
kept up, but if the feeding was stopped, the miserable symptoms
returned. One factor was always in evidence, that a woman who had no
ovaries never menstruated again. Premature change of life (menopause)
resulted. Ageing took place early. A loss of interest in the pleasant
things of life existed. As a wife or companion for the home the woman
was worse than useless. Her life was so miserable that all who came in
contact with her were made miserable, also. She was unsexed, and one of
the "sparks of life" had been taken away. She assumed characteristics of
the male. If the testes of a man are removed he will assume the
characteristics of a woman. Many changes will take place. His mind is no
longer clear, he tires easily, cannot concentrate upon any subject, and
has marked loss of memory and of physical well being. The things that
once appealed to him are now undesirable. The opposite sex are repulsive
and he shuns their society. A man or woman who suffers the premature
loss of their glands of regeneration will become more or less defective
mentally and their life will be materially shortened.

At one time a favorite expression was, "A man is as old as his
arteries." We know better than this now. A man is just as old as he
feels, when said feeling is directed to his sex organs. The first sign
of old age is impotency, and more men are reaching a premature impotency
than ever before in the history of the world. Their glands are burning
up, as it were. After impotency is well on its way arterio-sclerosis or
hardening of the arteries is noticed, then the mental inefficiency, as
well as physical weakness. Right on the heels of impotency comes
prostatitis. I was taught in medical school that nearly all men suffered
from an enlarged prostate and prostatitis: that it was one of the
diseases of "old age"; that we were heir to it and might expect it to
show up after the age of 45. I was also taught that arterio-sclerosis
was another disease of old age, and all men were heir to it. However, we
are beginning to awaken to a few things. We are approaching the dawn of
a new day. We are beginning to understand the whys and wherefores. While
I have been criticized and called everything under the sun, except an
angel, I expected as much, and I am ready to face the world with my
facts; not theories. I have a long and hard fight before me yet.

[Illustration: THE TOGGENBURG GOATS]

The cures that I have effected by gland transplantation up to the
present time are enough to justify me for all of my work and efforts
along this new line of science. Should I never operate again, I feel
justly repaid and know that I have started something that will go on and
on and live forever. Gland transplantation for the cure of disease
within the next ten years will be as common as the removal of a diseased
appendix is now. You can hardly pick up a daily paper without reading an
account of some surgeon performing a wonderful operation of
transplanting bone or tissue from some animal to replace that which was
diseased in the human. Why not borrow what we need from the animal? We
use their flesh for food. We also use their gland substances in the
fresh or dried form to supply our bodies with whatever we may not
possess.

My first efforts in gland transplantation were directed towards the cure
of sterility. A man came to me who had been impotent for sixteen years.
Every known means had been used in his case. My experiments in the use
of glands from animal to animal, led me to believe that if the gland
from a goat could be transplanted into the human body this impotency and
sterility could be overcome. This man was willing to try anything as he
was 46 and his wife was 42. They were very anxious for a male child.
Twelve months after the transplantation I delivered his wife of a
10-pound baby boy, who is alive and well today. In appreciation of what
the goat glands had done for them they named the baby "Billy." He lives
within four miles of me now. This first case being a wonderful success
encouraged me to experiment with humans on a larger scale. Willing
subjects were not easy to obtain. After obtaining, it was difficult to
operate. The operation or experiment could not be performed in any of
the general hospitals. Ethics as well as country and little town gossip
forbid such work. It was necessary for me to build a hospital of my own
so that my experiments could be carried on without the public or
profession knowing anything about them. If good results were obtained I
could announce to the world; if none were obtained the matter could be
dropped. After four male children had been born, due directly to gland
transplantation, the news leaked out, and has swept the world like
wildfire. While I was transplanting glands for sterility, other
beneficial effects were noted by me as well as my patients. Now, since I
have transplanted glands into more than 600 men and women it is an easy
matter to give some comprehensive statistics. A complete record is kept
of each case and follow-up letters are used so that we are in a pretty
fair way to estimate just what we are doing. Five cases of insanity have
been cured to date. The great difficulty in obtaining insane people for
operation is, they are confined in a state institution, and the
authorities will not permit their removal, especially when their loved
ones tell the "higher ups" they wish Dr. Brinkley, "the gland man," to
transplant goat glands. "Oh, no, it's all rot and will never do!"
However, we have operated upon five cases and have cured five cases.
After awhile we will break down this great wall of prejudice, and insane
people will be ordered out for this operation. At present when habeas
corpus proceedings are all that will obtain the release, and gland
transplantation is the object, not much of a chance exists. I am going
to mention one of our very interesting cases, as the man lives only
about 15 or 20 miles from me in Dickinson County, Kansas. His name is
Lon Jones, and his case is known far and wide within the state of
Kansas. My writing about Mr. Jones will not be the betrayal of a
professional secret. He is anxious for the world to know about it. Some
six weeks or two months before I was called to see him he was stricken
suddenly, insane. He had mounted his horse and was driving his cattle
home for the night when it was noticed by others that he acted "queer."
He began to whip and fight his steed as well as the cattle unmercifully.
He dismounted or fell off his horse and at first was thought
unconscious. A physician was called, another, and another, and his case
was diagnosed as Dementia Praecox. Violent in character. He wanted to
kill his doctor, or commit some rash act. One of the first acts was to
try and give away all of his land and stock as well as corn and feed.

It was unsafe for his wife and children to be near him. Men remained
with him, day and night. Finally his guards had to tie him in bed. His
arms and feet were securely fastened, as well as his body, to a heavy
iron bed. Application for his entry into the state institution had been
made when I was called. With the assistance of neighbor men he was
conducted into my hospital here. Immediate gland transplantation was
performed, and three days after said operation he asked me to remove his
irons so that he could rest comfortably. He informed me that he was in
his right mind and we need have no further fear of him. Soon afterwards
he was permitted to roam around the building and over town. He went home
more than a year ago and is transacting his business as a sane man
should. No evidence of his former trouble has occurred. He did not know
until the day that we discharged him what my line of treatment had been.
Another notable case was that of a man who had spent 11 years of his
life in three state institutions for the insane in New York. He left
here entirely cured and is now holding an important position in New York
City. Another case was that of a young man who became insane suddenly.
His first act was to try and murder his father and mother, his greatest
bitterness being directed towards his mother. He attempted to kill me
when I approached him, and it was necessary to open a bottle of
chloroform and stand at a safe distance and throw the anesthetic in his
face and eyes. Less than a week after the operation he was in his right
mind, and has been so since. Another case of a young man who became
insane and was violent. He secured a number of rifles and shotguns and
barricaded himself in a corn field. When he learned I had been sent for
he was worse than ever, and if it had not been for his mother I would
have been killed. I operated upon him immediately, and for one week
after the operation I could not visit him. However, he soon was in his
right mind, and when it was told to him what he had done he went to
Indianapolis, Ind., and secured a position. His shame was so great that
he could not remain where he was known. After two years he returned home
and resumed work where he had left off. The fifth case was just as
interesting as the above.

I have operated upon and cured 5 cases of locomotor-ataxia. It is almost
impossible for me to get cases of locomotor-ataxia. When a man writes me
he also asks his family physician, who very quickly informs him "there
is nothing to it; it's all bunk!"

My cases have ranged in age from 18 to 75 years. My patients that are
from 60 to 75 years of age write me they feel as they did when they were
boys 18 years of age. I have transplanted glands for almost every
conceivable disease and have received splendid results in almost every
case. All cannot be cured, but all of them can be greatly benefited. At
this writing I have with me as a patient a noted United States Senator
from Washington, D.C. He has been treated by Dr. Cary T. Grayson, the
president's personal physician, as well as taking 3 years of treatment
at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He is depressed and discouraged. He speaks of
suicide. He has been operated on only two days and I venture to say that
before his week is passed he will be a different man.

My greatest number of men come for impotency, next for prostatitis, and
many for a general improvement in health. Many come with but one
purpose--to prolong their lives. I believe that those who receive gland
transplantation will live much longer than without it. Possibly as much
as from 10 to 25 years can be added. Then successive transplants can be
made, and we have no idea how long they will live. Their skin takes on
the appearance of youth. I know that after the ovaries have been
transplanted into women who have none their menses return on a 4-day
period regularly. Women who had passed the menopause have a return flow.
Hardening of the arteries as well as high blood pressure are returned to
normal in 100 per cent of the cases. Eyesight is improved from 50 to 100
per cent. A well-known judge was operated upon by me a short time ago,
and his eyesight was so much improved that he could no longer wear
glasses of any kind. Men who had not heard for 16 years write me that
since gland transplantation they can hear the tick of a watch. In women
a development of the bust is noted and the wrinkles disappear from their
cheeks. Chronic constipation is cured as well as old chronic skin
diseases, such as psoriasis, eczema, etc.

With the best will in the world I am unable to describe on paper just
how my fellow practitioners should perform this operation, because I
never meet with precisely similar conditions in any two cases. I can say
positively that I do not know just what I shall do until the case itself
is under my hands in the operating room. The operation is simple in
itself, but in my early days of operating I made a number of mistakes
because I was on new ground, and there was no authority from whom I
could learn the technique. Now, after my six hundred operations have
taught me what to do and how to do I am able to avoid these earlier
mistakes, and as a consequence I hardly ever have an operation that is
not a success. Not very many months ago I was called to San Francisco to
re-operate on a number of cases which had gone wrong in the hands of a
fellow practitioner. I re-operated on these cases successfully. The
surgeon who had performed the operation in the first place is skilful
and experienced in all lines of surgical work, but in this particular
line of transplanting of goat-glands into human bodies in such wise that
the tissue of the goat will blend with and nourish the human tissue no
living man except myself has had the necessary experience to teach him
through his successes and failures, what to do and how to do it. Nor
should I be successful if today, in spite of all the work I have done
with the Goat-Glands, I should relinguish the goat-gland in favor of the
human-gland or the monkey-gland. Results have taught me that I made a
wise choice in pinning my faith to the young goat as the healthiest
possible animal from which tissue could be used for transplanting into
human bodies. The goat is immune to practically all diseases. The human
being and the monkey, on the other hand, are liable to tuberculous or
some tropical disease. For his splendid work with human glands I give
full credit to Dr. Frank Lydston of Chicago, who was not only the
pioneer in this use of human glands, but actually made his first
transplantation upon himself. This is but another instance of that fine
confidence in our beliefs and convictions which is typical of the
medical profession as a whole. In the use of the human-gland Dr. Lydston
is as supreme as I am in the use of the goat-gland, and you must
understand that in saying this I am not throwing bouquets at myself in
idle vanity. I have a clear cold reason for saying this. I have devoted
my life to this particular work, and have brought it to a point where I
can speak with authority upon it. I foresee that because of the
marvelous results obtained by the transplanting of the goat-glands at my
hospital there will be a great awakening of interest in this operation
on the part of the public and the medical profession. A great many
operations of a similar character will be performed not alone in this
country, but all over the world. A great many of these operations will
be unsuccessful because the experience of the operator will not have
taught him what to do under certain unusual conditions, or rather, what
to do under any and all conditions. In the face of an unsuccessful
operation this work will be blamed, and the theory upon which I work,
namely, that the sex-energy is the basis of all human energy, physical
and mental, will be given a setback, and scouted as untrue. But I am
constantly proving its truth by the results I get, and find its
confirmation in the effect of successful goat-gland transplantation in
both men and women. Therefore I am urgent in saying that the work must
be rightly done in the first place to obtain right results.

Briefly, the operation for men means that the glands of a three weeks'
old male goat are laid upon the non-functioning glands of a man, within
twenty minutes of the time they are removed from the goat. In some cases
I open the human gland and lay the tissue of the goat within the human
gland. The scrotum of the man is opened by incision on both sides under
local anesthetic. Conditions of the case may show that there are
adhesions of tissue which must also be broken down before the new gland
can function. I find that after being properly connected these
goat-glands do actually feed, grow into, and become absorbed by the
human glands, and the man is renewed in his physical and mental vigor.

The operation upon women means that the ovaries of a female goat not
more than twelve months of age are removed and inserted into the woman.
If the woman's organs are sound and merely inert and atrophied, the new
ovary will find its way to its proper position and begin the work of
restoring the arrested functions, so that the act of menstruation, for
example, which has ceased because of the atrophic condition of the
woman's ovaries, begins again and continues on a normal twenty-eight day
period. The effect of the new glands upon women is even more noticeable,
if such a thing were possible, than upon men, since in their case the
rejuvenation is more striking in the changed appearance. But though I
claim much, and with good reason, for this operation, I warn against
undue expectations. In many cases I advise against the operation as a
sure waste of time and money. In many cases I explain that the results
will be experimental only, there being nothing in my experience to
warrant assurance of success. For instance, in blindness and deafness I
have no faith that this operation will remove the disease in spite of
the fact that in almost every case operated upon there is great
improvement in the sight and hearing. But I have no certain knowledge
why this improvement followed. It partakes, therefore, of the nature of
an accident. In the case of very fat people the operation trims them
down to normal weight. Very thin people are built up to normal weight by
it. Barren women and impotent men become mothers and fathers. But in no
case do I permit a grandfather or grandmother to entertain the hope that
they may be rejuvenated to such an extent that they can procreate again
if they wish. This is mere romance, with which I have nothing to do. Nor
do I advise a young woman of forty who has not reached the menopause
stage to take the operation if she is in good health, in spite of her
belief that the goat-glands will enable her to remain indefinitely
young. This is experimental work, and is not in the same class as the
case of the same woman who has just passed through her menopause and
ceased to menstruate. By all means I advise the latter to take the
operation because I feel that it will rejuvenate her. If a woman has had
both ovaries removed by surgical operation, will this operation grow new
ovaries for her, and enable her to become a mother? At this stage of my
knowledge my answer is, "Certainly not." If a man has lost both glands
by surgical removal will this operation grow new glands for him? Nine
times out of ten, "No." The tenth time, "Yes." I do not know why.

I can use only a certain breed of goat, a Swiss milk goat, and only
animals of a certain youth. My goats cost me about $75 each on an
average, and that is one reason why it would be impossible to conduct
this work as a free surgical clinic might be conducted, unless the
undertaking were specially endowed with funds to meet the expense.

Some time in the month of June I expect to make a trip to London,
England, and will be away possibly until the end of August. Even the
month of May in Kansas is sometimes too hot for this operation to be
successfully performed, and I make it a rule to suspend operations
entirely throughout June, July and August. Experience has taught me that
when the outdoor temperature is high the operation will almost certainly
be unsuccessful, and on account of the cost involved, as well as for the
saving of time and trouble for the patient, it is in the highest degree
unwise to go contrary to this rule. If the glands are transplanted
during very hot weather they will almost certainly slough, which means
re-operating later.

In many cases that are brought to me I do not operate or even advise
that the goat-glands be transplanted later. I cannot go into details of
such cases in these pages, but might cite the case of a man, syphilitic,
who was sent to me. Certainly I have never made the statement anywhere,
at any time, that this operation would cure syhpilis. The man is being
treated now for syphilis, and should not have been sent to me at all.

I quote the case of a woman of forty, who is normal in every way, and
the picture of health at the present time. Her desire is that she may
never grow to look any older than she does at this moment, and she asks
me if this gland-operation will hold her at the point she has now
reached. Frankly, this is pure experiment. I do not know. After another
ten years of work in this gland-surgery I might be able to give her a
definite opinion, but not at this stage, seeing that my oldest cases go
back only three years. On one point only I can speak with positiveness,
namely, if I cannot answer this question there is no man living who can
answer it, because I am the only man alive who can give an opinion on
this work that is founded on first-hand knowledge. We learn in this work
only by experience, and we draw just conclusions only from +quantity+ of
experience. No other man alive has had this experience in sufficient
quantity to justify him in forming a conclusion derived from his facts.
This is my answer not only to those who listen to encouraging advice
regarding the effects of this operation tendered by surgeons who are
embarking in this goat-gland operation, but also to those general
practitioners who inform patients asking their opinion in the matter
that the operation is useless because the glands are certain to slough,
I hold that they are not qualified to speak on the subject because they
have no knowledge. I have the most positive knowledge that when the
operation is rightly performed the glands do NOT slough, and my
knowledge is founded upon the hard facts of much experience. In another
ten years I shall know more than I know today because I shall have added
to my facts, and among those facts there may be some which confirm the
hope of the woman of forty alluded to above that this gland
transplantation may hold the condition of youth steady as something
static, which will not be suffered to pass. At present I do not know,
and if I offer an opinion it is to be understood that it is only a
guess. My guess, then, would be that in this case the operation would be
a waste, producing no effect whatever, neither adding to nor detracting
from the condition of health and normal function which is present today.




       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

The One Best Way Series of New Thought Books. Each 96 pages and cover,
green silk cloth bound, printed on heavy egg-shell paper, size 5x7.
Written by Sydney B. Flower. Price each, $1 postpaid to any part of the
world; four shillings and twopence in Great Britain.

No. I. Will-Power, Personal Magnetism, Memory-Training and Success
(illustrated).

No. II. The Biochemistry of Schuessler.

No. III. The New Thought System of Physical Culture and Beauty Culture
(illustrated).

No. IV. The New Thought System of Dietetics.

No. V. The Goat-Gland Transplantation, originated by Dr. J. R. Brinkley
of Milford, Kas., U.S.A.

Address New Thought Book Department, 722-732 Sherman St., Chicago, Ill.,
U.S.A.

NOTE--The Chicago New Thought office closes from March 31st to September
1st, each year.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


VOLUME II OF NEW THOUGHT

Beginning October, 1921, ending March, 1922, comprising six numbers,
each 32 pages, 6x9, edited and published by Sydney B. Flower, will be
issued monthly at a markedly REDUCED SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, namely, Single
Copies in the U.S.A. and Possessions, 10 cents a copy; 50 cents a year
of six numbers; Canada and Foreign, 12 cents a copy; 60 cents a year.
Great Britain, sixpence a copy; 2/6 a year.

Note: The Chicago NEW THOUGHT office closes from March 31st to September
1st, each year.

Volume II of NEW THOUGHT will maintain the high level attained in Volume
I. The same contributors. Dr. Brinkley, Ella Wheeler Wilcox, William
Walker Atkinson, Anne Beauford Houseman, Alberta Jean Rowell, Nate
Collier, Charles H. Ingersoll, Athene Rondell, Charles Edmund DeLand and
others will continue their valuable series throughout the year.

The cartoons of Nate Collier and the articles of Arthur Brisbane will
continue as special features.

Many new writers will be added.

The editor will contribute a series of six articles upon the effects of
Dr. Brinkley's Goat-Gland Transplantation, speaking from first-hand
knowledge and inviting question, comment and discussion.

  SPECIAL THREE YEAR SUBSCRIPTION OR
  ONE YEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THREE
  DIFFERENT ADDRESSES

We make a special rate for three year subscriptions in the U.S.A. and
possessions of $1 for Volume II, October, 1921, to March, 1922,
inclusive, or one year subscription to three different addresses at the
same rate, $1; Canada and Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, six shillings.
We invite you to take fullest advantage of this attractive offer.

Address: NEW THOUGHT, 732 Sherman St., Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.


VOLUME I OF NEW THOUGHT

A monthly magazine, 32 pages, 6x9, edited and published by Sydney B.
Flower, comprising 196 pages of reading matter in seven issues, viz.,
Oct., Nov., Dec, 1920, and Jan., Feb., March, April-May, 1921.

Price, bound in cloth, $2.50, or Ten Shillings, postpaid to any part of
the world.

Volume I of NEW THOUGHT contains: Seven articles written by J. R.
Brinkley, M.D., on his wonderful goat-gland transplantation work;
a series of articles on New Thought by such famous writers as Ella
Wheeler Wilcox, William Walker Atkinson, Anne Beauford Houseman, Alberta
Jean Rowell, Veni Cooper-Mathieson, of Australia, and Nate Collier of
New York; a series of articles on Astrology by Athene Rondell; a series
of articles on Spirit-Phenomena by Charles Edmund DeLand; and begins a
series by Charles H. Ingersoll on the Single Tax. The volume includes
five regular monthly cartoons by Nate Collier; with special articles by
Arthur Brisbane, most highly paid writer in the United States, stating
the case against spiritualism; and a number of special articles by the
editor and others on Health, Psychology, etc.

The brightest and most vital and most fascinating magazine published.
Volume I is to be had only in its bound form, and the number of copies
is limited. No plates were made and the type is destroyed. The book is
therefore a unique and limited first edition.

Orders for this book will be accepted now, to be filled not later than
September 15, 1921, in the order of their receipt, cash to accompany
order.

Cash will be returned immediately to unsuccessful applicants. We shall
not reprint this book, after this bound edition is exhausted, in the
original and complete form in which you may now procure it.

Address: NEW THOUGHT, 732 Sherman St., Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.

Note: The Chicago NEW THOUGHT office closes from March 31st to September
1st, each year.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical Errors Noted by Transcriber

_Unless otherwise noted, errors were left as printed. Some variations
such as hyphenization may be carried over from quoted material._

  phemonena familiar to all of us  [phenomena]
  has sometimes made a laporotomy necessary [laparotomy]
  the belief now general among genetists and anatomists
    [_form "genetists" may be correct for 1921_]
  incision in the acrotum  [scrotum]
  On the other hand, in Locomoter Ataxia  [Locomotor]
  his cures of Locomoter Ataxia by the goat-gland operation  [Locomotor]
    [_these two misprints are on the same page_]
  and thirty-five other Chicago men and women by Dr. J. R. Brinkley
    [_invisible period in Dr. supplied by transcriber_]
  Dr. Brinkley's operation to-day is a marvel
    [_anomalous hyphen at mid-line_]
  Ageing took place early.  [Aging]
  I have operated upon and cured 5 cases of locomotor-ataxia. It is
  almost impossible for me to get cases of locomotor-ataxia.
    [_anomalous hyphens unchanged_]
  I should relinguish the goat-gland  [relinquish]
  that this operation would cure syhpilis  [syphilis]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Goat-gland Transplantation, by 
Sydney B. Flower and John R. Brinkley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOAT-GLAND TRANSPLANTATION ***

***** This file should be named 29362.txt or 29362.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/6/29362/

Produced by Louise Hope and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
