Project Gutenberg's The House in the Water, by Charles G. D. Roberts

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The House in the Water
       A Book of Animal Stories

Author: Charles G. D. Roberts

Illustrator: Charles Livingston Bull
             Frank Vining Smith

Release Date: August 28, 2009 [EBook #29839]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE IN THE WATER ***




Produced by Roger Frank, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









THE HOUSE IN THE WATER

A BOOK OF ANIMAL STORIES




THE HOUSE IN THE WATER

A BOOK OF ANIMAL STORIES

BY CHARLES G. D. ROBERTS

Author of "The Kindred of the Wild," "Red Fox," "The Heart of the Ancient
Wood," "The Forge in the Forest," "The Heart That Knows," etc.

Illustrated and decorated by

CHARLES LIVINGSTON BULL and FRANK VINING SMITH

THE PAGE COMPANY

PUBLISHERS BOSTON




Copyright, 1907, by Curtis Publishing Company

Copyright, 1908, by Funk & Wagnalls Company

Copyright, 1908, by The Circle Publishing Company

Copyright, 1908, by Associated Sunday Magazines, Incorporated

Copyright, 1908, by L. C. Page & Company (Incorporated)

All rights reserved

First Impression, May, 1908

Third Impression, May, 1916

THE COLONIAL PRESS

C. H. SIMONDS CO., BOSTON, U. S. A.




CONTENTS OF THE BOOK

                                                                  PAGE
  The House in the Water                                             1
  The White-slashed Bull                                           125
  When the Blueberries Are Ripe                                    152
  The Glutton of the Great Snow                                    163
  When the Truce of the Wild is Done                               192
  The Window in the Shack                                          204
  The Return of the Moose                                          225
  From the Teeth of the Tide                                       235
  The Fight at the Wallow                                          252
  Sonny and the Kid                                                271




A LIST OF THE FULL-PAGE DRAWINGS IN THE BOOK

                                                                  PAGE
  "Began to climb out upon the crest of the dam."                    7
  "A foraging fish-hawk winging above."                             15
  "The otter moved with unusual caution."                           19
  "Suddenly rearing his sleek, snaky body half out of the
      water."                                                       23
  "Poked his head above water."                                     33
  "Sticky lumps, which they could hug under their chins."           41
  "Twisted it across his shoulders, and let it drag behind
      him."                                                         54
  "Every beaver now made a mad rush for the canal."                 58
  "It was no longer a log, but a big gray lynx."                    62
  "He caught sight of a beaver swimming down the pond."             72
  "'Or even maybe a bear.'"                                         90
  "He drowns jest at the place where he come in."                   96
  "Hunted through the silent and pallid aisles of the forest."     102
  "A sinister, dark, slow-moving beast."                           106
  "He sprang with a huge bound that landed him, claws open,
      squarely on the wolverene's hind quarters."                  110
  "It was not until the moon appeared ... that Jabe began to
      call."                                                       142
  "Something gleamed silver down his side."                        148
  "An old she-bear with two half-grown cubs."                      154
  "Crept slowly around the raging and snarling captive."           170
  "Snapped back at him with a vicious growl."                      176
  "Running in the shallow water to cover his scent"                200
  "Sniffed loudly along the crack of the door."                    212
  "Made a wild thrust at the dreadful face."                       216
  "A magnificent, black, wide-antlered bull, an ungainly brown
      cow, and a long-legged, long-eared calf."                    228
  "Pulled the butt under her chest."                               248
  "He 'belled' harshly several times across the dark wastes."      254
  "In a flash was up again on his haunches."                       268
  "He curled down his abbreviated tail, and ran."                  280
  "In his fright the kid dropped his toadstool and stared back
      at the gray animal."                                         292




THE HOUSE IN THE WATER

CHAPTER I

The Sound in the Night


UPON the moonlit stillness came suddenly a far-off, muffled, crashing
sound. Just once it came, then once again the stillness of the
wilderness night, the stillness of vast, untraversed solitude. The Boy
lifted his eyes and glanced across the thin reek of the camp-fire at
Jabe Smith, who sat smoking contemplatively. Answering the glance, the
woodsman muttered "old tree fallin'," and resumed his passive
contemplation of the sticks glowing keenly in the fire. The Boy, upon
whom, as soon as he entered the wilderness, the taciturnity of the
woodsfolk descended as a garment, said nothing, but scanned his
companion's gaunt face with a gravely incredulous smile.

So wide-spread and supreme was the silence that five seconds after
that single strange sound had died out it seemed, somehow, impossible
to believe it had ever been. The light gurgle of the shallow and
shrunken brook which ran past the open front of the travellers'
"lean-to" served only to measure the stillness. Both Jabe and the Boy,
since eating their dinner, had gradually forgotten to talk. As the
moon rose over the low, fir-crested hills they had sunk into reverie,
watching the camp-fire die down.

At last, with a sort of crisp whisper a stick, burnt through the
middle, fell apart, and a flicker of red flame leaped up. The woodsman
knocked out his pipe, rose slowly to his feet, stretched his gaunt
length, and murmured, "Reckon we might as well turn in."

"That's all right for you, Jabe," answered the Boy, rising also,
tightening his belt, and reaching for his rifle, "but I'm going off to
see what I can see. Night's the time to see things in the woods."

Jabe grunted non-committally, and began spreading his blanket in the
lean-to. "Don't forgit to come back for breakfast, that's all," he
muttered. He regarded the Boy as a phenomenally brilliant hunter and
trapper spoiled by sentimental notions.

To the Boy, whose interest in all pertaining to woodcraft was much
broader and more sympathetic than that of his companion, Jabe's
interpretation of the sound of the falling tree had seemed hasty and
shallow. He knew that there was no better all-round woodsman in these
countries than Jabe Smith; but he knew also that Jabe's interest in
the craft was limited pretty strictly to his activities as hunter,
trapper and lumberman. Just now he was all lumberman. He was acting as
what is called a "timber-cruiser," roaming the remoter and less-known
regions of the wilderness to locate the best growths of spruce and
pine for the winter's lumbering operations, and for the present
his keen faculties were set on the noting of tree growths, and
water-courses, and the lay of the land for the getting out of a
winter's cutting. On this particular cruise the Boy--who, for all
the disparity in their years and the divergence in their views, was
his most valued comrade--had accompanied him with a special object
in view. The region they were cruising was one which had never been
adequately explored, and it was said to be full of little unnamed,
unmapped lakes and streams, where, in former days, the Indians had
had great beaver hunting.

When the sound of the falling tree came to his ears across the
night-silence, the Boy at once said to himself, "Beavers, at work!" He
said it to himself, not aloud, because he knew that Jabe also, as a
trapper, would be interested in beavers; and he had it in his mind to
score a point on Jabe. Noiseless as a lynx in his soft-soled
"larrigans," he ascended the half-empty channel of the brook, which
here strained its shrunken current through rocks and slate-slabs,
between steep banks. The channel curved steadily, rounding the
shoulder of a low ridge. When he felt that he had travelled somewhat
less than half a mile, he came out upon a bit of swampy marsh, beyond
which, over the crest of a low dam, spread the waters of a tranquil
pond shining like a mirror in the moonlight.

The Boy stopped short, his heart thumping with excitement and
anticipation. Here before him was what he had come so far to find.
From his books and from his innumerable talks with hunter and trapper,
he knew that the dam and the shining, lonely pond were the work of
beavers. Presently he distinguished amid the sheen of the water a
tiny, grassy islet, with a low, dome-shaped, stick-covered mound at
one end of it. This, plainly, was a beaver house, the first he had
ever seen. His delighted eyes, observing it at this distance, at once
pronounced it immeasurably superior to the finest and most pretentious
muskrat-house he had ever seen--a very palace, indeed, by comparison.
Then, a little further up the pond, and apparently adjoining the
shore, he made out another dome-shaped structure, broader and less
conspicuous than the first, and more like a mere pile of sticks. The
pond, which was several acres in extent, seemed to him an extremely
spacious domain for the dwellers in these two houses.

Presently he marked a black trail, as it were, moving down in the
middle of the radiance from the upper end of the pond. It was
obviously the trail of some swimmer, but much too broad, it seemed, to
be made by anything so small as a beaver. It puzzled him greatly. In
his eagerness he pushed noiselessly forward, seeking a better view,
till he was within some thirty feet of the dam. Then he made out a
small dark spot in the front of the trail,--evidently a beaver's head;
and at last he detected that the little swimmer was carrying a bushy
branch, one end held in his mouth while the rest was slung back
diagonally across his shoulders.

The Boy crept forward like a cat, his gray eyes shining with
expectancy. His purpose was to gain a point where he could crouch in
ambush behind the dam, and perhaps get a view of the lake-dwellers
actually at work. He was within six or eight feet of the dam,
crouching low (for the dam was not more than three feet in height),
when his trained and cunning ear caught a soft swirling sound in the
water on the other side of the barrier. Instantly he stiffened to a
statue, just as he was, his mouth open so that not a pant of his
quickened breath might be audible. The next moment the head of a
beaver appeared over the edge of the dam, not ten feet away, and
stared him straight in the face.

The beaver had a stick of alder in its mouth, to be used, no doubt, in
some repairing of the dam. The Boy, all in gray as he was, and
absolutely motionless, trusted to be mistaken for one of the gnarled,
gray stumps with which the open space below the dam was studded. He
had read that the beaver was very near-sighted, and on that he based
his hopes, though he was so near, and the moonlight so clear, that he
could see the bright eyes of the newcomer staring straight into his
with insistent question. Evidently, the story of that near-sightedness
had not been exaggerated. He saw the doubt in the beaver's eye fade
gradually into confidence, as the little animal became convinced that
the strange gray figure was in reality just one of the stumps. Then,
the industrious dam-builder began to climb out upon the crest of the
dam, dragging his huge and hairless tail, and glancing along as if to
determine where the stick which he carried would do most good. At this
critical moment, when the eager watcher felt that he was just about to
learn the exact methods of these wonderful architects of the wild, a
stick in the slowly settling mud beneath his feet broke with a soft,
thick-muffled snap.

[Illustration: "BEGAN TO CLIMB OUT UPON THE CREST OF THE DAM."]

So soft was the sound that it barely reached the Boy's ears. To the
marvellously sensitive ears of the beaver, however, it was a warning
more than sufficient. It was a noisy proclamation of peril. Swift as a
wink of light, the beaver dropped his stick and dived head first into
the pond. The Boy straightened up just in time to see him vanish. As
he vanished, his broad, flat, naked tail hit the water with a cracking
slap which resounded over the pond like a pistol-shot. It was reëchoed
by four or five more splashes from the upper portion of the pond.
Then all was silence again, and the Boy realized that there would be
no more chance that night for him to watch the little people of the
House in the Water. Mounting the firm-woven face of the dam and
casting his eyes all over the pond, he satisfied himself that two
houses which he had first seen were all that it contained. Then,
resisting the impulse of his excitement, which was to explore all
around the pond's borders at once, he resolutely turned his face back
to camp, full of thrilling plans for the morrow.




CHAPTER II

The Battle in the Pond


AT breakfast, in the crisp of the morning, while yet the faint
mists clung over the brook and the warmth of the camp-fire was
attractive, the Boy proclaimed his find. Jabe had asked no questions,
inquisitiveness being contrary to the backwoodsman's code of
etiquette; but his silence had been full of interrogation. With his
mouth half-full of fried trout and cornbread, the Boy remarked:

"That was no windfall, Jabe, that noise we heard last night!"

"So?" muttered the woodsman, rather indifferently.

Without a greater show of interest than that the Boy would not divulge
his secret. He helped himself to another flaky pink section of trout,
and became seemingly engrossed in it. Presently the woodsman spoke
again. He had been thinking, and had realized that his prestige had
suffered some kind of blow.

"Of course," drawled the woodsman sarcastically, "it wa'n't no
windfall. I jest said that to git quit of bein' asked questions when I
was sleepy. I knowed all the time it was beaver!"

"Yes, Jabe," admitted the Boy, "it was beavers. I've found a big
beaver-pond just up the brook a ways--a pond with two big beaver-houses
in it. I've found it--so I claim it as mine, and there ain't to be
any trapping on that pond. Those are my beavers, Jabe, every one of
them, and they sha'n't be shot or trapped!"

"I don't know how fur yer injunction'd hold in law," said Jabe dryly,
as he speared a thick slab of bacon from the frying-pan to his tin
plate. "But fur as I'm concerned, it'll hold. An' I reckon the boys of
the camp this winter'll respect it, too, when I tell 'em as how it's
your own partic'lar beaver pond."

"Bless your old heart, Jabe!" said the Boy. "That's just what I was
hoping. And I imagine anyway there's lots more beaver round this
region to be food for the jaws of your beastly old traps!"

"Yes," acknowledged Jabe, rising to clear up, "I struck three likely
ponds yesterday, as I was cruisin over to west'ard of the camp. I
reckon we kin spare you the sixteen or twenty beaver in 'Boy's
Pond!'"

The Boy grinned appreciation of the notable honour done him in the
naming of the pond, and a little flush of pleasure deepened the red of
his cheeks. He knew that the name would stick, and eventually go upon
the maps, the lumbermen being a people tenacious of tradition and not
to be swerved from their own way.

"Thank you, Jabe!" he said simply. "But how do you know there are
sixteen or twenty beaver in my pond?"

"You said there was two houses," answered the woodsman. "Well, we
reckon always from eight to ten beaver to each house, bein' the old
couple, and then three or four yearlin's not yet kicked out to set up
housekeeping fer themselves, and three or four youngsters of the
spring's whelping. Beavers' good parents, an' the family holds
together long's the youngsters needs it. Now I'm off. See you here at
noon, fer grub!" and picking up his axe he strode off to southwestward
of the camp to investigate a valley which he had located the day
before.

Left alone, the Boy hurriedly set the camp in order, rolled up the
blankets, washed the dishes, and put out the last of the fire. Then,
picking up his little Winchester, which he always carried,--though he
never used it on anything more sensitive than a bottle or a tin
can,--he retraced his steps of the night before, up-stream to the
beaver pond.

Knowing that the beavers do most of their work, or, at least, most of
their above-water work, at night, he had little hope of catching any
of them abroad by daylight. He approached the dam, nevertheless, with
that noiseless caution which had become a habit with him in the woods,
a habit which rendered the woods populous for him and teeming with
interest, while to more noisy travellers they seemed quite empty of
life. One thing his study of the wilderness had well taught him, which
was that the wild kindreds do not by any means always do just what is
expected of them, but rather seem to delight in contradicting the
naturalists.

When he reached the edge of the open, however, and peered out across
the dam, there was absolutely nothing to break the shining morning
stillness. In the clear sunlight the dam, and the two beaver-houses
beyond, looked larger and more impressive than they had looked the
night before. There was no sign of life anywhere about the pond,
except a foraging fish-hawk winging above it, with fierce head
stretched low in the search for some basking trout or chub.

[Illustration: "A FORAGING FISH-HAWK WINGING ABOVE."]

Following the usual custom of the wild kindreds themselves, the Boy
stood motionless for some minutes behind his thin screen of bushes
before revealing himself frankly in the open. His patient watch being
unrewarded, he was on the very verge of stepping forth, when from the
tail of his eye he caught a motion in the shallow bed of the brook,
and ducked himself. He was too wary to turn his head; but a moment
later a little brown sinuous shape came into his field of view. It was
an otter, making his way up-stream.

The otter moved with unusual caution, glancing this way and that
and seeming to take minute note of all he saw. At the foot of the
dam he stopped, and investigated the structure with the air of one
who had never seen it before. So marked was this air that the Boy
concluded he was a stranger to that region,--perhaps a wanderer
from the head of the Ottanoonsis, some fifteen miles southward,
driven away by the operations of a crew of lumbermen who were
building a big lumber-camp there. However that might be, it was
evident that the brown traveller was a newcomer, an outsider. He
had none of the confident, businesslike manner which a wild animal
wears in moving about his own range.

When he had stolen softly along the whole base of the dam, and back
again, nosing each little rivulet of overflow, the otter seemed
satisfied that this was much like all other beaver dams. Then he
mounted to the crest and took a prolonged survey of the stretch of
water beyond. Nothing unusual appearing, he dived cleanly into the
pond, about the point where, as the Boy guessed, there would be the
greatest depth of water against the dam. He was apparently heading
straight up for the inlet of the pond, on a path which would take him
within about twenty-five or thirty yards of the main beaver-house on
the island. As soon as he had vanished under the water the Boy ran
forward, mounted the crest of the dam, and peered with shaded eyes to
see if he could mark the swimmer's progress.

[Illustration: "THE OTTER MOVED WITH UNUSUAL CAUTION."]

For a couple of minutes, perhaps, the surface of the pond gave no
indication of the otter's whereabouts. Then, just opposite the main
beaver-house, there was a commotion in the water, the surface curled
and eddied, and the otter appeared in great excitement. He dived again
immediately; and just as he did so the head of a huge beaver poked up
and snatched a breath. Where the two had gone under, the surface of
the pond now fairly boiled; and the Boy, in his excitement over this
novel and mysterious contest, nearly lost his balance on the frail
crest of the dam. A few moments more and both adversaries again came
to the surface, now at close grips and fighting furiously. They were
followed almost at once by a second beaver, smaller than the first,
who fell upon the otter with insane fury. It was plain that the
beavers were the aggressors. The Boy's sympathies were all with the
otter, who from time to time tried vainly to escape from the battle;
and once he raised his rifle. But he bethought him that the otter,
after all, whatever his intentions, was a trespasser; and that the
beavers had surely a right to police their own pond. He remembered an
old Indian's having told him that there was always a blood feud
between the beaver and the otter; and how was he to know how just the
cause of offence, or the stake at issue? Lowering his gun he stared in
breathless eagerness.

The otter, however, as it proved, was well able to take care of
himself. Suddenly rearing his sleek, snaky body half out of the water,
he flashed down upon the smaller beaver and caught it firmly behind
the ear with his long, deadly teeth--teeth designed to hold the
convulsive and slippery writhings of the largest salmon. With mad
contortions the beaver struggled to break that fatal grip. But the
otter held inexorably, shaking its victim as a terrier does a rat, and
paid no heed whatever to the slashing assaults of the other beaver.
The water was lashed to such a turmoil that the waves spread all over
the pond, washing up to the Boy's feet on the crest of the dam, and
swaying the bronze-green grasses about the house on the little island.
Though, without a doubt, all the other citizens of the pond were
watching the battle even more intently than himself, the Boy could not
catch sight of so much as nose or ear. The rest of the spectators kept
close to the covert of grass tuft and lily pad.

[Illustration: "SUDDENLY REARING HIS SLEEK, SNAKY BODY HALF OUT OF THE
WATER."]

All at once the small beaver stiffened itself out convulsively on top
of the water, turned belly up, and began to sink. At the same time the
otter let go, tore free of his second and more dangerous adversary,
and swam desperately for the nearest point of shore. The surviving
beaver, evidently hurt, made no effort to follow up his victory, but
paddled slowly to the house on the island, where he disappeared.
Presently the otter gained the shore and dragged himself up. His
glossy brown skin was gashed and streaming with blood, but the Boy
gathered that his wounds were not mortal. He turned, stared fixedly at
the beaver-house for several seconds as if unwilling to give in, then
stole off through the trees to seek some more hospitable water. As he
vanished, repulsed and maltreated, the Boy realized for the first time
how hostile even the unsophisticated wilderness is to a stranger.
Among the wild kindreds, even as among men, most things worth having
are preempted.

When the Boy's excitement over this strange fight had calmed down, he
set himself with keen interest to examining the dam. He knew that by
this time every beaver in the pond was aware of his presence, and
would take good care to keep out of sight; so there was no longer
anything to be gained by concealment. Pacing the crest, he made it to
be about one hundred feet in length. At the centre, and through a
great part of its length, it was a little over three feet high, its
ends diminishing gradually into the natural rise of the shores. The
base of the dam, as far as he could judge, seemed to be about twelve
feet in thickness, its upper face constructed with a much more gradual
slope than the lower. The whole structure, which was built of poles,
brush, stones, and earth, appeared to be very substantial, a most
sound and enduring piece of workmanship. But along the crest, which
was not more than a foot and a half in width, it was built with a
certain looseness and elasticity for which he was at a loss to
account. Presently he observed, however, that this dam had no place of
overflow for letting off the water. The water stood in the pond at a
height that brought it within three or four inches of the crest. At
this level he saw that it was escaping, without violence, by
percolating through the toughly but loosely woven tissue of sticks and
twigs. The force of the overflow was thus spread out so thin that its
destructive effect on the dam was almost nothing. It went filtering,
with little trickling noises, down over and through the whole lower
face of the structure, there to gather again into a brook and resume
its sparkling journey toward the sea.

The long upper slope of the dam was smoothly and thoroughly faced with
clay, so that none of its framework showed through, save here and
there the butt of a sapling perhaps three or four inches in diameter,
which proclaimed the solidity of the foundations. The lower face, on
the other hand, was all an inexplicable interlacing of sticks and
poles which seemed at first glance heaped together at haphazard. On
examination, however, the Boy found that every piece was woven in so
firmly among its fellows that it took some effort to remove it. The
more he studied the structure, the more his admiration grew, and his
appreciation of the reasoning intelligence of its builders; and he
smiled to himself a little controversial smile, as he thought how
inadequate what men call instinct would be to such a piece of work as
this.

But what impressed him most, as a mark of engineering skill and sound
calculation on the part of the pond-people, was the direction in which
the dam was laid. At either end, where the water was shoal, and
comparatively dead even in time of freshet, the dam ran straight,
taking the shortest way. But where it crossed the main channel of the
brook, and required the greatest strength, it had a pronounced upward
curve to help it resist the thrust of the current. He contemplated
this strong curve for some time; then, a glance at the sun reminding
him that it was near noon, he took off his cap to the low-domed house
in the water and made haste back to camp for dinner.




CHAPTER III

In the Under-water World


MEANWHILE, in the dark chamber and the long, dim corridors of the
House in the Water there was great perturbation. The battle with the
otter had been a tremendous episode in their industrious, well-ordered
lives, and they were wildly excited over it. But much more important
to them--to all but the big beaver who was now nursing his triumphant
wounds--was the presence of Man in their solitude. Man had hitherto
been but a tradition among them, a vague but alarming tradition. And
now his appearance, yesterday and to-day, filled them with terror.
That vision of the Boy, standing tall and ominous on the dam, and
afterwards going forward and backward over it, pulling at it,
apparently seeking to destroy it, seemed to portend mysterious
disasters. After he was gone, and well gone, almost every beaver in
the pond, not only from the main house but also from the lodge over
on the bank, swam down and made a flurried inspection of the dam,
without showing his head above water, to see if the structure on which
they all depended had been tampered with. One by one, each on his own
responsibility, they swam down and inspected the water-face; and one
by one they swam back, more or less relieved in their minds.

All, of course, except the big beaver who had been in the fight. If it
had not been for that vision of the Boy, he would have crept out upon
the dry grass of the little island and there licked and comforted his
wounds in the comforting sunlight. Now, however, he dared not allow
himself that luxury. His strong love of cleanliness made him reluctant
to take his bleeding gashes into the house; but there was nothing else
to be done. He was the head of the household, however, so there was
none to gainsay him. He dived into the mouth of the shorter of the two
entrances, mounted the crooked and somewhat steep passage, and curled
himself upon the dry grass in one corner of the dark, secluded
chamber. His hurts were painful, and ugly, but none of them deadly,
and he knew he would soon be all right again. There was none of that
foreknowledge of death upon him which sometimes drives a sick animal
to abdicate his rights and crawl away by himself for the last great
contest.

The room wherein the big beaver lay down to recover himself was not
spacious nor particularly well ventilated, but in every other respect
it was very admirably adapted to the needs of its occupants. Through
the somewhat porous ceiling, a three-foot thickness of turf and
sticks, came a little air, but no light. This, however, did not matter
to the beavers, whose ears and noses were of more significance to them
than their eyes. In floor area the chamber was something like five
feet by six and a half, but in height not much more than eighteen
inches. The floor of this snug retreat was not five inches above the
level of the water in the passages leading in to it; but so
excellently was it constructed as to be altogether free from damp. It
was daintily clean, moreover; and the beds of dry grass around the
edges of the chamber were clean and fresh.

From this room the living, sleeping, and dining room of the beaver
family, ran two passageways communicating with the outside world. Both
of these were roofed over to a point well outside the walls of the
house, and had their opening in the bottom of the pond, where the
water was considerably more than three feet in depth. One of these
passages was perfectly straight, about two feet in width, and built on
a long, gradual slope. It was by this entrance that the house-dwellers
were wont to bring in their food supplies, in the shape of sticks of
green willow, birch and poplar. When these sticks were stripped clean
of their bark, which was the beavers' chief nourishment, they were
then dragged out again, and floated down to be used in the repair of
the dam. The other passage, especially adapted to quick exit in case
of danger from the way of the roof, was about as spacious as the
first, but much shorter and steeper. It was crooked, moreover,--for a
reason doubtless adequate to the architects, but obscure to mere human
observers. The exits of both passages were always in open water, no
matter how fierce the frosts of the winter, how thick the armour of
ice over the surface of the pond. In the neighbourhood of the house
were springs bubbling up through the bottom, and keeping the
temperature of the pond fairly uniform throughout the coldest weather,
so that the ice, at worst, never attained a thickness of more than a
foot and a half, even though in the bigger lakes of that region it
might make to a depth of three feet and over.

[Illustration: "POKED HIS HEAD ABOVE WATER."]

While the wounded beaver lay in the chamber licking his honourable
gashes, two other members of the family entered and approached him. In
some simple but adequate speech it was conveyed to them that their
presence was not required, and they retreated precipitately, taking
different exits. One swam to the grassy edge of the islet, poked his
head above water under the covert of some drooping weeds, listened
motionless for some minutes, then wormed himself out among the long
grasses and lay basking, hidden from all the world but the whirling
hawk overhead. The other, of a more industrious mould, swam off toward
the upper end of the pond where, as he knew, there was work to be
done.

Still as was the surface of the pond, below the surface there was life
and movement. Every little while the surface would be softly broken,
and a tiny ripple would set out in widening circles toward the shore,
starting from a small dark nose thrust up for a second. The casual
observer would have said that these were fish rising for flies; but
in fact it was the apprehensive beavers coming up to breathe, afraid
to show themselves on account of the Boy. They were all sure that he
had not really gone, but was in hiding somewhere, waiting to pounce
upon them.

It was the inhabitants of the House in the Water who were moving
about the pond, this retreat being occupied by their wounded and
ill-humoured champion. The inhabitants of the other house, over on
the shore, who had been interested but remote spectators through
all the strange events of the morning, were now in comfortable
seclusion, resting till it should be counted a safe time to go
about their affairs. Some were sleeping, or gnawing on sappy
willow sticks, in the spacious chamber of their house, while others
were in the deeper and more secret retreats of their two burrows
high up in the bank, connecting with the main house by roomy
tunnels partly filled with water. The two families were quite
independent of each other, except for their common interest in
keeping the great dam in repair. In work upon the dam they acted not
exactly in harmony but in amicable rivalry, all being watchful and all
industrious.

In the under-water world of the beaver pond the light from the
cloudless autumn sun was tawny gold, now still as crystal, now
quivering over the bottom in sudden dancing meshes of fine shadow as
some faint puff of air wrinkled the surface. When the dam was first
built the pond had been of proper depth--from three to four feet--only
in the channel of the stream; while all the rest was shallow, the old,
marshy levels of the shore submerged to a depth of perhaps not more
than twelve or fifteen inches. Gradually, however, the industrious
dam-builders had dug away these shallows, using the material--grass,
roots, clay, and stones--for the broadening and solidifying of the
dam. The tough fibred masses of grass-roots, full of clay and almost
indestructible, were just such material as they loved to work with,
the ancient difficulty of making bricks without straw being well known
to them. Over a large portion of the pond the bottom was now clean
sand and mud, offering no obstacle to the transportation of cuttings
to the houses or the dam.

The beavers, moving hither and thither through this glimmering golden
underworld, swam with their powerful hind feet only, which drove them
through the water like wedges. Their little forefeet, with flexible,
almost handlike paws, were carried tucked up snugly under their chins,
while their huge, broad, flat, hairless tails stuck straight out
behind, ready to be used as a powerful screw in case of any sudden
need. Presently two of the swimmers, apparently by chance, came upon
the body of the beaver which the journeying otter had slain. They knew
that it was contrary to the laws of the clan that any dead thing
should be left in the pond to poison the waters in its decay. Without
ceremony or sentiment they proceeded to drag their late comrade toward
shore,--or rather to shove it ahead of them, only dragging when it got
stuck against some stone or root. At the very edge of the pond, where
the water was not more than eight or ten inches deep, they left it, to
be thrust out and far up the bank after nightfall. They knew that some
hungry night prowler would then take care of it for them.

Meanwhile an industriously inclined beaver had made his way to the
very head of the pond. Here he entered a little ditch or canal which
led off through a wild meadow in a perfectly straight line, toward a
wooded slope some fifty yards or so from the pond. This ditch, which
was perhaps two feet and a half deep and about the same in width,
looked as if it had been dug by the hand of man. The materials taken
from it had been thrown up along the brink, but not on one side only,
as the human ditch-digger does it. The beavers had thrown it out on
both sides. The ditch was of some age, however, so the wild grasses
and weeds had completely covered the two parallel ridges and now
leaned low over the water, partly hiding it. Under this screen the
beaver came to the surface, and swam noiselessly with his head well
up.

At the edge of the slope the canal turned sharply to the left, and ran
in a gradual curve, skirting the upland. Here it was a piece of new
work, raw and muddy, and the little ridges of fresh earth and roots
along its brink were conspicuous. The beaver now went very cautiously,
sniffing the air for any hint of peril. After winding along for some
twenty or thirty yards, the new canal shoaled out to nothingness
behind a screen of alder; and here, in a mess of mud and water, the
beaver found one of his comrades hard at work. There was much of the
new canal yet to do, and winter coming on.

The object of this new ditch was to tap a new food supply. The food
trees near enough to the pond to be felled into it or rolled down to
it had long ago been used. Then the straight canal across the meadow
to the foot of the upland had opened up a new area, an area rich in
birch and poplar. But trees can be rolled easily down-hill that cannot
be dragged along an uneven side-hill; so, at last, it had become
necessary to extend the canal parallel with the bottom of the slope.
Working in this direction, every foot of new ditch brought a lot of
new supplies within reach.

[Illustration: "STICKY LUMPS, WHICH THEY COULD HUG UNDER THEIR CHINS."]

The extremity of the canal was dug on a slant, for greater ease in
removing the material. Here the two beavers toiled side by side,
working independently. With their teeth they cut the tough sod as
cleanly as a digger's spade could do it. With their fore paws they
scraped up the soil--which was soft and easily worked--into sticky
lumps, which they could hug under their chins and carry up the slope
to be dumped upon the grass at the side. Every minute one or the other
would stop, lift his brown head over the edge, peer about, and sniff,
and listen, then fall to work again furiously, as if the whole future
and fortune of the pond were hanging upon his toil. After a
half-hour's labour the canal was lengthened very perceptibly--fully
six or eight inches--and as if by common consent the two brown
excavators stopped to refresh themselves by nibbling at some succulent
roots. While they were thus occupied, and apparently absorbed, from
somewhere up the slope among the birch-trees came the faint sound of a
snapping twig. In half a second the beavers had vanished noiselessly
under water, down the canal, leaving but a swirl of muddy foam to mark
their going.




CHAPTER IV

Night Watchers


WHEN the Boy came creeping down the hillside, and found the water in
the canal still muddy and foaming, he realized that he had just missed
a chance to see the beavers actually at work on their ditch-digging.
He was disappointed. But he found ample compensation in the fact that
here was one of the much-discussed and sometimes doubted canals,
actually in process of construction. He knew he could outdo the
beavers in their own game of wariness and watchfulness. He made up his
mind he would lie out that very night, on the hillside close by--and
so patiently, so unstirringly, that the beavers would never suspect
the eager eyes that were upon them.

All around him, on the nearer slopes, were evidences of the purpose
for which the canal was designed, as well as of the diligence with
which the little people of the pond were labouring to get in their
winter stores. From this diligence, so early in the season, the Boy
argued an early and severe winter. He found trees of every size up to
two feet in diameter cleanly felled, and stripped of their branches.
With two or three exceptions--probably the work of young beavers
unskilled in their art--the trees were felled unerringly in the
direction of the water, so as to minimize the labour of dragging down
the cuttings. Close to the new part of the canal, he found the tree
whose falling he and Jabe had heard the night before. It was a tall
yellow birch, fully twenty inches through at the place where it was
cut, some fifteen inches from the ground. The cutting was still fresh
and sappy. About half the branches had been gnawed off and trimmed,
showing that the beavers, after being disturbed by the Boy's visit to
the dam, had returned to work later in the night. Much of the smaller
brush, from the top, had been cleared away and dragged down to the
edge of the canal. As the Boy knew, from what trappers and woodsmen
had told him, this brush, and a lot more like it, would all be
anchored in a huge pile in mid-channel, a little above the dam, where
it would serve the double purpose of breaking the force of the floods
and of supplying food through the winter.

Very near the newly felled birch the Boy found another large tree
about half cut through; and he vowed to himself that he would see the
finish of that job that very night. He found the cutting done pretty
evenly all around the tree, but somewhat lower and deeper on the side
next to the water. In width the cut was less than that which a good
axeman would make--because the teeth of a beaver are a more frugal
cutting instrument than the woodsman's axe, making possible a
straighter and less wasteful cut. At the foot of this tree he picked
up chips fully eight inches in length, and was puzzled to imagine how
the beavers imitated the effect of the axe in making the chips fly
off.

For a couple of hours the Boy busied himself joyously, observing the
work of these cunning woodsmen's teeth, noting the trails by which the
remoter cuttings had been dragged down to the water, and studying the
excavations on the canal. Then, fearing to make the little citizens of
the pond so nervous that they might not come out to business that
night, he withdrew over the slope and made his way back to camp. He
would sleep out the rest of the afternoon to be fresh and keen for the
night's watching.

At supper that evening, beside the camp-fire, when the woods looked
magical under the still, white moon, Jabe Smith gradually got fired
with the Boy's enthusiasm. The Boy's descriptions of the canal
digging, of the structure of the dam, and, above all, of the battle
between the otter and the beavers, filled him with a new eagerness to
observe these wonderful little engineers with other eyes than those of
the mere hunter and trapper. In the face of all the Boy's exact
details he grew almost deferential, quite laying aside his usual
backwoods pose of indifference and half derision. He made no move to
go to bed, but refilled his pipe and watched his young comrade's face
with shrewd, bright eyes grown suddenly boyish.

At last the Boy rose and picked up his rifle.

"I must hurry up and get myself hidden," said he, "or I'll see nothing
to-night. Good night, Jabe. I'll not be back, likely, till along
toward morning."

The backwoodsman's usual response was not forthcoming. For some
seconds he fingered his rugged chin in silence. Then, straightening
himself up, he spoke with an air of mingled embarrassment and
carelessness.

"Them beaver of yourn's certainly an interestin' kind of varmint.
D'ye know, blam'd if I ain't got a notion to go along with you
to-night, an' watch 'em myself!"

The Boy, though secretly delighted at this evidence of something like
conversion, eyed Jabe doubtfully. He was not sure of the latter's
capacity for the tireless patience and long self-effacement necessary
for such an adventure as this.

"Well, Jabe," he answered hesitatingly, "you know well how more than
glad I'd be of your company. It would just about double my fun, having
you along, if you were really interested, as I am, you know. And are
you sure you could keep still long enough to see anything?"

Jabe would have resented this halting acceptance of his companionship
had he not known in his heart that it was nothing more than he well
deserved. But the doubt cast upon his woodcraft piqued him.

"Hain't I never set for hours in the wet ma'sh, never movin' a finger,
waitin' for the geese?" he asked with injury in his voice. "Hain't I
never sneaked up on a watchin' buck, or laid so still I've fooled a
bear?"

The Boy chuckled softly at this outbreak, so unexpected in the
taciturn and altogether superior Jabe.

"You're all right, Jabe!" said he. "I reckon you can keep still. But
you must let me be captain, for to-night! This is my trick."

"Sartain," responded the woodsman with alacrity. "I'll eat mud if you
say so! But I'll take along a hunk of cold bacon if you hain't got no
objection."

On the trail through the ghostly, moonlit woods, Jabe followed
obediently at the Boy's heels. Silently as shadows they moved,
silently as the lynx or the moose or the weasel goes through the
softly parting undergrowth. The Boy led far away from the brook, and
over the crest of the ridge, to avoid alarming the vigilant sentries.
As they approached the head of the canal, their caution redoubled, and
they went very slowly, bending low and avoiding every patch of
moonlight. The light breeze, so light as to be almost imperceptible,
drew upward toward them from the meadow, bringing now and then a scent
of the fresh-dug soil. At last the Boy lay down on his belly; and Jabe
religiously imitated him. For perhaps fifty yards they crept forward
inch by inch, till at length they found themselves in the heart of a
young fir thicket, through whose branches they could look out upon the
head of the canal and the trees where the beavers had most recently
been cutting.

Among the trees and in the water, all was still, with the mystic,
crystalline stillness of the autumn moonlight. In that light
everything seemed fragile and unreal, as if a movement or a breath
might dissolve it. After a waiting of some ten minutes Jabe had it on
the tip of his tongue to whisper, derisively, "Nothin' doin'!" But he
remembered the Boy's injunction, as well as his doubts, and checked
himself. A moment later a faint, swirling gurgle of water caught his
ear, and he was glad he had kept silence. An instant more, and the
form of a beaver, spectral-gray in the moonlight, took shape all at
once on the brink of the canal. For several minutes it stood there
motionless, erect upon its hind quarters, questioning the stillness
with eyes and ear and nose. Then, satisfied that there was no danger
near, it dropped on all fours and crept up toward the tree that was
partly cut through.

This pioneer of the woodcutters was followed immediately by three
others, who lost no time in getting down to work. One of them went to
help the leader, while the other two devoted themselves to trimming
and cutting up the branches of the big birch which they had felled
the night before. The Boy wondered where the rest of the pond-people
were, and would have liked to consult Jabe about it; but he remembered
the keenness of the beaver's ears, and held his tongue securely. It
seemed to him probably that they were still down in the pond, working
on the houses, the brush pile, or the dam. Presently one more was
accounted for. A renewed splashing in the canal turned the attention
of the watchers from the tree-cutting, and they saw that a single wise
excavator was at work, carrying forward the head of the ditch.

There was no impatience or desire to fidget left in Jabe Smith now. As
he watched the beavers at work in the moonlight, looking very
mysterious in their stealthy, busy, tireless diligence, and conducting
their toil with an ordered intelligence which seemed to him almost
human, he understood for the first time the Boy's enthusiasm for this
kind of bloodless hunting. He had always known how clever the beavers
were, and allowed them full credit; but till now he had never actually
realized it. The two beavers engaged in cutting down the tree sat
erect upon their haunches, supported by their huge tails, chiseling
indefatigably. Cutting two deep grooves, one about six or eight
inches, perhaps, above the other, they would then wrench off the chips
by main force with their teeth and forepaws, jerking their powerful
necks with a kind of furious impatience. As he noted how they made the
cut deeper and lower on one side than the other, that the tree might
fall as they wished, he was so delighted that he came dangerously near
vowing he would never trap a beaver again. He felt that it was almost
like ensnaring a brother woodsman.

Equally exciting was the work on the other tree, which was being
trimmed. The branches, according to their size, were cut into neat,
manageable lengths, of from three to six or seven feet--the less the
diameter the greater the length, each piece being calculated to be
handled in the water by one beaver. These pieces were then rolled,
shoved or dragged, as the case might require, down the smooth trails
already made in hauling the brush, and dumped into the canal. Other
beavers presently appeared, and began towing the sticks and brush down
the canal to the pond. This part of the process was hidden from the
eager watchers in the thicket; but the Boy guessed, from his own
experience in pushing a log endwise before him while in swimming, that
the beavers would handle the sticks in the same way. With the brush,
however, it was different. In hauling it down the trail each beaver
took a branch in his teeth, by the butt, twisted it across his
shoulders, and let it drag behind him. It was obvious that in the
water, too, this would be the most convenient way to handle such
material. The beavers were not the kind of people to waste their
strength in misdirected effort.

[Illustration: "TWISTED IT ACROSS HIS SHOULDERS, AND LET IT DRAG BEHIND
HIM."]

While all this cutting and hauling was going on, the big beaver down
at the head of the canal was attending strictly to his task, running
his lines straight, digging the turf and clay, shoving his loads up
the slope and out upon the edge of the ditch. The process was all in
clear, easy view of the watchers, their place of hiding being not more
than eight or ten paces distant.

They had grown altogether absorbed in watching the little canal-builder,
when a cracking sound made them turn their eyes. The tree was toppling
slowly. Every beaver now made a mad rush for the canal, not caring
how much noise he made--and plunged into the water. Slowly,
reluctantly, majestically, the tall birch swung forward straight down
the slope, its top describing a great arc against the sky and
gathering the air in its branches with a low but terrifying roar. The
final crash was unexpectedly gentle,--or rather, would have seemed so
to one unfamiliar with tree-felling. Some branches snapped, some
sticks flew up and dropped, there was a shuddering confusion in the
crystal air for a few seconds, then the stillness fell once more.

But now there was not a beaver to be seen. Jabe wondered if they had
been scared by the results of their own work; or if one of their
sentinels had come and peered into the thicket from the rear. As
minute after minute dragged by, and nothing happened, he began to
realize that his muscles were aching savagely from their long
restraint. He was on the point of moving, of whispering to ask the Boy
what it meant, when the latter, divining his unrest, stealthily laid a
restraining hand upon his arm. He guessed that the beavers were on the
alert, hiding, and watching to see if any of their enemies should be
attracted by the noise.

[Illustration: "EVERY BEAVER NOW MADE A MAD RUSH FOR THE CANAL."]

Not five seconds later, however, he forgot his aches. Appearing with
uncanny and inexplicable suddenness, there was the big pioneer again,
sitting up by the edge of the canal. As before, he sat absolutely
motionless for a minute or two, sniffing and listening. Then,
satisfied once more that all was well, he moved lazily up the slope to
examine the tree; and in half a minute all were at work again, except
that there was no more tree-felling. The great business of the hour
was cutting brush.

For some time longer the watchers lay motionless, noting every detail
of the work, till at last the Boy began to think it was time to
release Jabe from his long and severe restraint and break up the
beaver "chopping-bee." Before he had quite made up his mind, however,
his eyes chanced to wander a little way up the slope, and to rest,
without any conscious purpose, on a short gray bit of log. Presently
he began to wonder what a piece of log so short and thick--not much
more than three feet long--would be doing there. No beavers would
waste time cutting up a twelve-inch log into lengths like that. And
there had been no lumberman in the neighbourhood. Then, in a flash,
his eyes cleared themselves of their illusion. The log had moved, ever
so slightly. It was no longer a log, but a big gray lynx, creeping
slowly, inexorably, down upon the unsuspecting people of the pond.

For perhaps ten seconds the Boy stared in uncertainty. Then he saw the
lynx gather his muscles for the final, fatal rush. Without a whisper
or a warning to the astonished Jabe, he whipped up his rifle, and
fired.

The sharp report seemed to shatter the whole scene. Its echoes were
mixed with the scattering of the horrified beavers as they rushed for
the water--with the short screech of the lynx, as it bounced into the
air and fell back on its side, dead--with an exclamation of
astonishment from Jabe--and with a crashing of branches just behind
the thicket. The Boy looked around, triumphant--to see that Jabe's
exclamation was not at all the result of his clever shot. The woodsman
was on his hands and knees, his back turned, and staring at the form
of a big black bear as it lumbered off in a panic through the bushes.
Like the unfortunate lynx, the bear had been stalking the beavers on
his own account, and had almost stepped upon the silent watchers in
the thicket.

[Illustration: "IT WAS NO LONGER A LOG, BUT A BIG GRAY LYNX."]




CHAPTER V

Dam Repairing and Dam Building


AS the Boy trudged triumphantly back toward camp, over the crest of
the moon-bright ridge, he carried the limp, furry body of the lynx
slung by its hind legs over his shoulder. He felt that his prestige
had gone up incalculably in the woodsman's eyes. The woodsman was
silent, however, as silent as the wilderness, till they descended the
other slope and came in sight of the little solitary camp. Then he
said: "That was a mighty slick shot of yourn, d'ye know it? Ye're
quicker'n chain lightnin', an' dead on!"

"Just luck, Jabe!" replied the Boy carelessly, trying to seem properly
modest.

This different suggestion Jabe did not take the trouble to controvert.
He knew the Boy did not mean it.

"But I thought as how ye wouldn't kill anything?" he went on,
teasingly.

"Had to!" retorted the Boy. "That was self-defence! Those beavers are
my beavers. An' I've always wanted a real good excuse for getting a
good lynx skin, anyway!"

"I don't blame ye a mite fer standin' by them beaver!" continued Jabe.
"They're jest all right! It was better'n any circus; an' I don't know
when I've enjoyed myself more."

"Then the least you can do, Jabe, is promise not to trap any more
beavers!" said the Boy quickly.

"Wa'al," answered Jabe, as they entered camp and began spreading their
blankets, "leastwise I'll do my best to see that no harm comes to them
beaver, nor to the pond."

Next morning, as the woodsman was starting out for the day's cruise,
the Boy said to him:

"If you're game for another night's watching, Jabe, I'll show you
something altogether different up at the pond to-night."

"Try me!" responded the woodsman.

"You'll have to be back earlier than usual, then," said the Boy.
"We'll have to get hidden earlier, and in a new place."

"I'll come back along a couple of hours afore sundown, then," answered
Jabe, swinging off on his long, mooselike stride. It was contrary to
his backwoods etiquette to ask what was in store for him; but his
curiosity was excited, and kept him company through the solitude all
day.

When Jabe was gone, the Boy went straight up-stream to the dam, taking
no special care to hide his coming. His plan was one in regard to
which he felt some guilty qualms. But he consoled himself with the
thought that whatever harm he might be doing to the little citizens of
the pond would be more than compensated by the protection he was
giving them. He was going to make a break in the dam, for the sake of
seeing just how the beavers would mend it.

On reaching the dam, however, it occurred to him that if he made the
break now the beavers might regard the matter as too urgent to be left
till nightfall. They might steal a march on him by mending the damage
little by little, surreptitiously, through the day. He had no way of
knowing just how they would take so serious a danger as a break in
their dam. He decided, therefore, to postpone his purpose till the
afternoon, so that the beavers would not come to the rescue too early.
In the meantime, he would explore the stream above the pond, and see
if there were other communities to study.

Skirting the hither side of the pond to near its head, he crossed the
little meadow and the canal, and reached the brook again about fifty
yards beyond. Here he found it flowing swift and narrow, over a rocky
bottom, between high banks; and this was its character for nearly half
a mile, as he judged. Then, emerging once more upon lower ground, he
came upon a small dam. This structure was not much over eighteen
inches in height, and the pond above it, small and shallow, showed no
signs of being occupied. There was no beaver house to be seen, either
in the water or on shore; and the water did not seem to be anywhere
more than a foot and a half in depth. As he puzzled over this--for he
did not think the beavers were likely to build a dam for nothing--he
observed a second and much larger dam far away across the head of the
pond.

Hastening to investigate this upper dam, he found it fully three feet
high, and very massive. Above it was a narrow but deep pond, between
comparatively steep shores; and along these shores he counted three
low-roofed houses. Out in the middle of the pond there was not one
dwelling; and he came presently to the conclusion that here, between
the narrow banks, the current would be heavy in time of freshet. The
lower dam, pretty obviously, was intended to reinforce the upper, by
backing a foot and a half of water against it and taking off just that
much of the pressure. He decided that the reason for locating the
three houses along the shore was that the steep bank afforded special
facilities for shore burrows.

The explorer's fever being now hot upon him, the Boy could not stay to
examine this pond minutely. He pressed on up-stream with breathless
eagerness, thrilling with expectation of what the next turn might
reveal. As a matter of fact, the next turn revealed nothing--nor the
next, nor yet the next. But as the stream was full of turns in this
portion of its course, that was not greatly discouraging.

About a quarter of a mile, however, above the head of the narrow pond,
the ardent explorer came upon a level of sparse alder swamp. Here he
found the stream just beginning to spread over its low banks. The
cause of this spreading was a partial obstruction in mid-channel--what
looked, at first glance, like an accidental accumulation of brush and
stones and mud. A second look, however, and his heart jumped with
excitement and delight. Here was the beginning of a new pond, here
were the foundations of a new dam. He would be able to see what few
indeed of the students of the wilderness had had the opportunity to
watch--the actual process by which these wilderness engineers achieved
their great work.

All about the place the straightest and brushiest alders had been cut
down, those usually selected being at least ten or twelve feet in
height. Many of them were still lying where they fell; but a number
had been dragged to the stream and anchored securely, with stones and
turfy clay, across the channel. The Boy noted, with keenest
admiration, that these were all laid with the greatest regularity
parallel with the flow of the current, butts up stream, brushy tops
below. In this way, the current took least hold upon them, and was
obstructed gradually and as it were insidiously, without being
challenged to any violent test of strength. Already it was lingering
in some confusion, backing up, and dividing its force, and stealing
away at each side among the bushes. The Boy had heard that the
beavers were accustomed to begin their dams by felling a tree across
the channel and piling their materials upon that as a foundation. But
the systematic and thorough piece of work before him was obviously
superior in permanence to any such slovenly makeshift; and moreover,
further to discredit such a theory, here was a tall black ash close to
the stream and fairly leaning over it, as if begging to be put to some
such use.

At this spot the Boy stayed his explorations for the day. Choosing a
bit of dry thicket close by, to be a hiding-place for Jabe and himself
that night, a bunch of spruce and fir where he knew the beavers would
not come for supplies, he hurried back to the camp for a bite of
dinner, giving wide berth to all the ponds on the way. Building a tiny
camp-fire he fried himself a couple of slices of bacon and brewed a
tin of tea for his solitary meal, then lay down in the lean-to, with
the sun streaming in upon him, for an hour's nap.

The night having been a tiring one for his youthful nerves and
muscles, he slept heavily, and awoke with a start to find the sun a
good two hours nearer the horizon. Sleep was still heavy upon him, so
he went down to the edge of the brook and plunged his face into the
chilly current. Then, picking up an axe instead of his rifle, he
returned up-stream to the dam.

As he drew near, he caught sight of a beaver swimming down the pond,
towing a big branch over its shoulder; and his conscience smote him at
the thought of the trouble and anxiety he was going to inflict upon
the diligent little inhabitants. His mind was made up, however. He
wanted knowledge, and the beavers would have to furnish it, at
whatever cost. A few minutes of vigorous work with the axe, a few
minutes of relentless tugging and jerking upon the upper framework of
the dam, and he had made a break through which the water rushed
foaming in a muddy torrent. Soon, as he knew, the falling of the
pond's level would alarm the house-dwellers, and bring them out to see
what had happened. Then, as soon as darkness came, there would be a
gathering of both households to repair the break.

[Illustration: "HE CAUGHT SIGHT OF A BEAVER SWIMMING DOWN THE POND."]

Hiding in the bushes near by, he saw the water slowly go down, but for
half an hour the beavers gave no sign. Then, close beside the break, a
big fellow crawled out upon the slope of the dam and made a careful
survey of the damage. He disappeared; and presently another came, took
a briefer look, and vanished. A few minutes later, far up the pond,
several bushy branches came to the surface, as if they had been
anchored on the bottom and released. They came, apparently floating,
down toward the dam. As they reached the break, the heads of several
beavers showed themselves above water, and the branches were guided
across the opening, where they were secured in some way which the
watcher could not see. They did not so very greatly diminish the
waste, but they checked the destructive violence of it. It was
evidently a temporary makeshift, this; for in the next hour nothing
more was done. Then the Boy got tired, and went back to camp to wait
for Jabe and nightfall.

That evening the backwoodsman, forgetting the fatigue of his day's
cruising in the interest of the Boy's story, was no less eager than
his companion; and the two, hurrying through an early supper, were off
for the pond in the first purple of twilight. When they reached the
Boy's hiding-place by the dam the first star was just showing itself
in the pallid greenish sky, and the surface of the pond, with its
vague, black reflections, was like a shadowed mirror of steel. There
was not a sound on the air except the swishing rush of the divided
water over the break in the dam.

The Boy had timed his coming none too early; for the pond had dropped
nearly a foot, and the beavers were impatient to stop the break. No
sooner had night fairly settled down than suddenly the water began to
swirl into circles all about the lower end of the pond, and a dozen
heads popped up. Then more brush appeared, above the island-house, and
was hurriedly towed down to the dam. The brush which had been thrust
across the break was now removed and relaid longitudinally, branchy
ends down stream. Here it was held in place by some of the beavers
while others brought masses of clayey turf from the nearest shore to
secure it. Meanwhile more branches were being laid in place, always
parallel with the current; and in a little while the rushing noise of
the overflow began to diminish very noticeably. Then a number of
short, heavy billets were mixed with shorter lengths of brush; and all
at once the sound of rushing ceased altogether. There was not even the
usual musical trickling and tinkling, for the level of the pond was
too low for the water to find its customary stealthy exits. At this
stage the engineers began using smaller sticks, with more clay, and a
great many small stones, making a very solid-looking piece of work. At
last the old level of the dam crest was reached, and there was no
longer any evidence of what had happened except the lowness of the
water. Then, all at once, the toilers disappeared, except for one big
beaver, who kept nosing over every square inch of the work for perhaps
two minutes, to assure himself of its perfection. When he, at last,
had slipped back into the water, both Jabe and the Boy got up, as if
moved by one thought, and stretched their cramped legs.

"I swan!" exclaimed the woodsman with fervour. "If that ain't the
slickest bit o' work I ever seen! Let's go over and kind of inspect
the job fer 'em!"

Inspection revealed that the spot which had just been mended was the
solidest portion of the whole structure. Wherever else the water might
be allowed to escape, it was plain the beavers intended it should have
no more outlet here.

From the mended dam the Boy now led Jabe away up-stream in haste, in
the hope of catching some beavers at work on the new dam in the
alders. Having skirted the long pond at a distance, to avoid giving
alarm, the travellers went with the utmost caution till they reached
the swampy level. Then, indifferent to the oozy, chilly mud, they
crept forward like minks stealing on their prey; and at last, gaining
the fir thicket without mishap, they lay prone on the dry needles to
rest.

As they lay, a sound of busy splashing came to their ears, which
promptly made them forget their fatigue. Shifting themselves very
slowly and with utter silence, they found that the place of ambush
had been most skilfully chosen. In perfect hiding themselves,
they commanded a clear and near view of the new dam and all its
approaches.

There were two beavers visible, paddling busily on the foundations
of the dam, while the overflowing water streamed about them,
covering their feet. At this stage, most of the water flowed
through the still uncompacted structure, leaving work on the top
unimpeded. The two beavers were dragging into place a long birch
sapling, perhaps eleven feet in length, with a thick, bushy top.
When laid to the satisfaction of the architects,--the butt, of course,
pointing straight up-stream,--the trunk was jammed firmly down
between those already placed. Then the more erect and unmanageable of
the branches were gnawed off and in some way--which the observers
with all their watchfulness could not make out--wattled down among
the other branches so as to make a woven and coherent mass. The
earth and sod and small stones which were afterwards brought and
laid upon the structure did not seem necessary to hold it in place,
but rather for the stoppage of the interstices.

While this was going on at the dam, a rustling of branches and
splashing of water turned the watchers' attention up-stream. Another
beaver came in sight, and then another, each partly floating and
partly dragging a straight sapling like the first. It seemed that the
dam-builders were not content to depend altogether on the crooked,
scraggly alder-growth all about them, but demanded in their
foundations a certain proportion of the straighter timbers and denser
branches of the birch. It was quite evident that they knew just what
they were doing, and how best to do it.

While the building was going on, yet another pair of beavers appeared,
and the work was pressed with a feverish energy that produced amazing
results. The Boy remembered a story told him by an old Indian, but
not confirmed by any natural history which he had come across, to the
effect that when a pair of young beavers set out to establish a new
pond, some of the old ones go along to lend a hand in the building of
the dam. It was plain that these workers were all in a tremendous
hurry; and the Boy could see no reason for haste unless it was that
the majority of the workers had to get back to their own affairs. With
the water once fairly brought under control, and the pond deep enough
to afford a refuge from enemies, the young pair could be trusted to
complete it by themselves, get their house ready, and gather their
supplies in for the winter. The Boy concluded to his own satisfaction
that what he was now watching was the analogue, in beaver life, to one
of those "house-raising" bees which sometimes took place in the
Settlement, when the neighbours would come together to help a man get
up the frame of a new house. Only, as it seemed to him, the beavers
were a more serious and more sober folk than the men.

When this wilderness engineering had progressed for an hour under the
watchers' eyes, Jabe began to grow very tired. The strain of physical
immobility told upon him, and he lost interest. He began to feel that
he knew all about dam-building; and as there was nothing more to learn
he wanted to go back to camp. He glanced anxiously at the young face
beside him--but there he could see no sign of weariness. The Boy was
aglow with enthusiasm. He had forgotten everything but the wonderful
little furry architects, their diligence, their skill, their
coöperation, and the new pond there growing swiftly before his eyes.
Already it was more than twice as wide as when they had arrived on the
scene; the dam was a good eight inches higher; and the clamour of the
flowing stream was stopped. No, Jabe could see no sympathy for himself
in that eager face. He was ashamed to beg off. And moreover, he was
loyal to his promise of obedience. The Boy, here, was Captain.

Suppressing a sigh, Jabe stealthily and very gradually shifted to an
easier position, so stealthily that the Boy beside him did not know he
had moved. Then, fixing his eyes once more upon the beavers, he tried
to renew his interest in them. As he stared, he began to succeed
amazingly. And no wonder! The beavers all at once began to do such
amazing things. There were many more of them than he had thought; and
he was sure he heard them giving orders in something that sounded to
him like the Micmac tongue. He could not believe his ears. Then he saw
that they were using larger stones, instead of mud and turf, in their
operations--and floating them down the pond as if they were corks. He
had never heard of such a thing before, in all his wilderness
experience. He was just about to compliment the Boy on this
unparalleled display of engineering skill, when one particularly large
beaver, who was hoisting a stone as big as himself up the face of the
dam, let his burden slip a little. Then began a terrible struggle
between the beaver and the stone. In his agonizing effort--which his
companions all stopped work to watch--the unhappy beaver made a loud,
gurgling, gasping noise; then, without a hint of warning, dropped the
stone with a splash, turned like lightning, and grabbed Jabe violently
by the arm.

The astonishing scene changed in a twinkling; and Jabe realized that
the Boy was shaking him.

"A nice one to watch beavers, you are!" cried the Boy, angry and
disappointed.

"Why--where've they all gone to?" demanded Jabe, rubbing his eyes.
"They're the most interestin' critters I ever hearn tell of!"

"Interesting!" retorted the Boy, scornfully. "So interesting you went
to sleep! And you snored so they thought it was an earthquake. Not
another beaver'll show a hair round here to-night. We'd better go
home!"

Jabe grinned sheepishly, but answered never a word; and silently, in
Indian file, the Boy leading, the two took the trail back to camp.




CHAPTER VI

The Peril of the Traps


AT breakfast next morning the Boy had quite recovered his good humour,
and was making merry at Jabe's expense. The latter, who was, of
course, defenceless and abashed, was anxious to give him something new
to think of.

"Say," he exclaimed suddenly, after the Boy had prodded him with a
searching jibe. "If ye'll let up on that snore, now, I'll take a day
off from my cruisin', and show ye somethin' myself."

"Good!" said the Boy. "It's a bargain. What will you show me?"

"I'll take ye over to one of _my_ ponds, in next valley, an' show ye
all the different ways of _trappin'_ beaver."

The Boy's face fell.

"But what do _I_ care about _trapping_ beaver?" he cried. "You know I
wouldn't trap anything. If I had to kill anything, I'd _shoot_ it,
and put it out of misery as quick as I could!"

"I know all that," responded Jabe. "But trappin' is somethin' ye want
to _understand_, all the same. Ye can't be an all-round woodsman 'less
ye _understand_ trappin'. An' moreover, there's some things ye learn
about wild critters in tryin' to git the better of 'em that ye can't
learn no other way."

"I guess you're right, Jabe!" answered the Boy, slowly. Knowledge he
would have, whether he liked the means of getting it or not. But the
woodsman's next words relieved him.

"I'll just show ye _how_, that's all!" said Jabe. "It's a leetle too
airly in the season yit fur actual trappin'. An' moreover, it's agin
the law. Agin the law, an' agin common sense, too, fer the fur ain't
no good, so to speak, fer a month yit. When the law an' common sense
stand together, then I'm fer the law. Come on!"

Picking up his axe, he struck straight back into the woods, in a
direction at right angles to the brook. To uninitiated eyes there was
no trail; but to Jabe, and to the Boy no less, the path was like a
trodden highway. The pace set by the backwoodsman, with his long,
slouching, loose-jointed, flat-footed stride, was a stiff one, but
the Boy, who was lean and hard, and used his feet straight-toed like
an Indian, had no fault to find with it. Neither spoke a word, as they
swung along single file through the high-arched and ancient forest,
whose shadows, so sombre all through summer, were now shot here and
there with sharp flashes of scarlet or pale gleams of aërial gold.
Once, rounding a great rock of white granite stained with faint
pinkish and yellowish reflections from the bright leaves glowing over
it, they came face to face with a tall bull moose, black and
formidable-looking as some antediluvian monster. The monster, however,
had no desire to hold the way against them. He eyed them doubtfully
for a second, and then went crashing off through the brush in frank,
undignified alarm.

For a good three miles the travellers swung onward, up a slow long
slope, and down a longer, slower one into the next valley. The Boy
noted that the region was one of numberless small brooks flowing
through a comparatively level land, with old, long-deserted
beaver-meadows interspersed among wooded knolls. Yet for a time there
were no signs of the actual living beavers. He asked the reason, and
Jabe said:

"It's been all trapped over an' over, years back, when beaver
pelts was high,--an' by Injuns, likely, who just cleaned out
everythin',--an' broke down the dams,--an' dug out the houses. But
the little critters is comin' back. Furder up the valley there's some
good ponds now!"

"And now they'll be cleaned out again!" exclaimed the Boy, with a rush
of indignant pity.

"Not on yer life!" answered Jabe. "We don't do things that way now. We
don't play low-down tricks on 'em an' clean out a whole family, but
jest take so many out of each beaver house, an' then leave 'em alone
two er three years to kinder recooperate!"

As Jabe finished they came in sight of a long, rather low dam, with a
pond spread out beyond it that was almost worthy to be called a lake.
It was of comparatively recent creation, as the Boy's observant eye
decided at once from the dead trees still rising here and there from
the water.

"Gee!" he exclaimed, under his breath. "That's a great pond, Jabe!"

"There's no less'n four beaver houses in that pond!" said the
woodsman, with an air of proud possession. "That makes, accordin' to
my reckonin', anywheres from thirty to thirty-six beaver. Bye and bye,
when the time comes, I'll kinder thin 'em out a bit, that's all!"

From the crest of the dam all four houses--one far out and three close
to shore--were visible to the Boy's initiated eye; though strangers
might have taken them to be mere casual accumulations of sticks
deposited by some whimsical freshet. It troubled him to think how many
of the architects of these cunningly devised dwellings would soon have
to yield up their harmless and interesting lives; but he felt no
mission to attempt a reform of humanity's taste for furs, so he did
not allow himself to become sentimental on the subject. Beavers, like
men, must take fate as it comes; and he turned an attentive ear to
Jabe's lesson.

"Ye know, of course," said the woodsman, "the steel trap we use. We
ain't got no use fer the tricks of the Injuns, though I'm goin' to
tell ye all _them_, in good time. An' we ain't much on new-fangled
notions, neether. But the old, smooth-jawed steel-trap, what kin
_hold_ when it gits a grip, an' not tear the fur, is good enough for
us."

"Yes, I know all your traps, of all the sizes you use, from muskrat up
to bear!" interrupted the Boy. "What size do you use for the beaver?"

"Number four," answered Jabe. "Jaw's got a spread of six and one-half
inches or thereabouts. But it's all in the where an' the how ye set
yer trap!"

"And that's what I want to know about!" said the Boy. "But why don't
you _shoot_ the poor little beggars? That's quicker for both, and just
as easy for you, ain't it?"

"T'ain't no use _shootin'_ a beaver, leastways not in the water! He
just sinks like a stone. No, ye've _got_ to trap him, to _git_ him.
Now, supposin' you was goin' to trap, where would ye set the traps?"

"I'd anchor them just in the entrances to their houses," answered the
Boy promptly. "Or along their canals, when they've got canals. Or
round their brush piles an' storage heaps. And when I found a tree
they'd just partly cut down, I'd set a couple of traps, covered up in
leaves, each side of the trunk, where they'd have to step on the pan
when they stood up to gnaw."

"Good for you!" said Jabe, with cordial approbation. "Ye'd make a
first-class trapper, 'cause ye've got the right notion. Every one of
them things is done, one time or another, by the old trapper. But
here's one or two wrinkles more killin' yet. An' moreover, if ye trap
a beaver on land ye're like to lose him one way or another. He's got
so much _purchase_, on land, with things to git hold on to; he's jest
as like as not to twist his leg clean off, an' git away. If it's one
of his fore legs, which is small an' slight, ye know, he's most sure
to twist it off. An' sometimes he'll do the trick even with a hind
leg. I've caught lots of beaver as had lost a fore leg, an' didn't
seem none the worse. The fur'd growed over it, an' they was slick an'
hearty. An' I've caught them as had lost a hind leg, an' they was in
good condition. A beaver'll stand a lot, I tell you. But then,
supposin' you git yer beaver, caught so fast he ain't no chance
whatever to git clear. Then, like as not, some lynx, or wildcat, or
fisher, or fox, or even maybe a bear, 'll come along an' help himself
to Mr. Beaver without so much as a by yer leave. No, ye want to git
him in the water; an' as he's just as anxious to git thar as you are
to git him thar, that suits all parties to a T."

[Illustration: "'OR EVEN MAYBE A BEAR.'"]

"Good!" said the Boy,--not that it really seemed to him good, but to
show that he was attending.

"But," continued Jabe, "what would ye say would most upset the beaver
and make 'em careless?"

The Boy thought for a moment.

"Breaking their dam!" he answered tentatively.

"_Eg_zactly!" answered the woodsman. "Well, now, to ketch beaver sure,
make two or three breaks in their dam, an' set the traps jest a leetle
ways above the break, on the upper slope, where they're sure to step
into 'em when hustlin' round to mend the damage. That gits 'em, every
time. Ye chain each trap to a stake, driven into three or four foot of
water; an' ye drive another stake about a foot an' a half away from
the first. When the beaver finds himself caught, he dives straight for
deep water,--his way of gittin' clear of most of his troubles. But
this time he finds it don't work. The trap keeps a holt, bitin' hard.
An' in his struggle he gits the chain all tangled up 'round the two
stakes, an' drowns himself. There you have him safe, where no lynx nor
fox kin git at him."

"Then, when one of them dies so dreadfully, right there before their
eyes," said the Boy, "I suppose the others skin out and let the
broken dam go! They must be scared to death themselves!"

"Not on yer life, they don't!" responded Jabe. "The dam's the thing
they care about. They jest keep on hustlin' round; an' they mend up
that dam if it takes half the beaver in the pond to do it. Oh, they're
grit, all right, when it comes to standin' by the dam."

"Hardly seems fair to take them that way, does it?" mused the Boy
sympathetically.

"It's a good way," asserted Jabe positively, "quick an' sure! Then, in
winter there's another good an' sure way,--where ye don't want to
clean out the whole house, which is killin' the goose what lays the
golden egg, like the Injuns does! Ye cut a hole in the ice, near the
bank. Then ye git a good, big, green sapling of birch or willow, run
the little end 'way out into the pond under the ice, an' ram the big
end, sharpened, deep into the mud of the bank, so the beaver can't
pull it out. Right under this end you set yer trap. Swimmin' round
under the ice, beaver comes across this fresh-cut sapling an' thinks
as how he's got a good thing. He set right to work to gnaw it off,
close to the bank, to take it back to the house an' please the
family. First thing, he steps right into the trap. An' that's the end
of him. But other beaver'll come along an' take the sapling, all the
same!"

"You spoke of the ways the Indians had, of cleaning out the whole
family," suggested the Boy, when Jabe had come to a long pause, either
because he was tired of talking or because he had no more to say.

"Yes, the Injuns' methods was complete. They seemed to have the idee
there'd always be beaver a-plenty, no matter how many they killed. One
way they had was to mark down the bank holes, the burrows, an' then
break open the houses. This, ye must understand, 's in the winter,
when there's ice all over the pond. When they're drove from their
houses, in the winter, they take straight to their burrows in the
bank, where they kin be sure of gittin' their heads above water to
breathe. Then, the Injuns jest drive stakes down in front of the
holes,--an' there they have 'em, every one. They digs down into the
burrows, an' knocks Mr. Beaver an' all the family on the head."

"Simple and expeditious!" remarked the Boy, with sarcastic approval.

"But the nestest job the Injuns makes," continued Jabe, "is by
gittin' at the brush pile. Ye know, the beaver keeps his winter
supply of grub in a pile,--a pile of green poles an' saplings an'
branches,--a leetle ways off from the house. The Injun finds this
pile, under the ice. Then, cuttin' holes through the ice, he drives
down a stake fence all 'round it, so close nary a beaver kin git
through. Then he pulls up a stake, on the side next the beaver
house, an' sticks down a bit of a sliver in its place. Now ye kin
guess what happens. In the house, over beyant, the beavers gits
hungry. One on 'em goes to git a stick from the pile an' bring it
inter the house. He finds the pile all fenced off. But a stick he
must have. Where the sliver is, that's the only place he kin git
through. Injun, waitin' on the ice, sees the sliver move, an' knows
Mr. Beaver's gone in. He claps the stake down agin, in place of the
sliver. An' then, of course, there's nawthin' left fer Mr. Beaver to
do but drown. He drowns jest at the place where he come in an'
couldn't git out agin. That seems to knock him out, like, an' he
jest gives up right there. Injun fishes him out, dead, puts the
sliver back, an' waits for another beaver. He don't have to wait
long--an' nine times outer ten he gits 'em all. Ye see, they _must_
git to the brush pile!"

[Illustration: "HE DROWNS JEST AT THE PLACE WHERE HE COME IN."]

"I'm glad _you_ don't trap them that way, Jabe!" said the Boy. "But
tell me, why did you bring me away out here to _this_ pond, to tell me
all this, when you could have done it just as well at _my_ pond?"

"I jest wanted the excuse," answered Jabe, "fer takin' a day off from
cruisin'. Now, come on, an' I'll show ye some more likely ponds."




CHAPTER VII

Winter Under Water


FOR three days more the Boy and Jabe remained in the beaver country;
and every hour of the time, except when he had to sleep, the Boy found
full of interest. In the daytime he compared the ponds and the dams
minutely, making measurements and diagrams. At night he lay in hiding,
beside a different pond each night, and gained a rich store of
knowledge of the manners and customs of the little wilderness
engineers. On one pond--his own, be it said--he made a rude raft of
logs, and by its help visited and inspected the houses on the island.
The measurements he obtained here made his note-book pretty complete,
as far as beaver life in summer and fall was concerned.

Then Jabe finished his cruising, having covered his territory. The
packs were made up and slung; the two campers set out on their three
days' tramp back to the settlements; and the solemn autumn quiet
descended once more upon the placid beaver ponds, the shallow-running
brooks, and the low-domed Houses in the Water.

As the weather grew colder; and the earlier frosts began to sheathe
the surface of the pond with clear, black ice, not melting out till
noon; and the bitten leaves, turning from red and gold to brown, fell
with ghostly whisperings through the gray branches, the little beaver
colony in Boy's Pond grew feverishly active. Some subtle prescience
warned them that winter would close in early, and that they must make
haste to finish their storing of supplies. The lengthening of their
new canal completed, their foraging grew easier. Trees fell every
night, and the brush pile reached a size that guaranteed them immunity
from hunger till spring. By the time the dam had been strengthened to
withstand the late floods, there had been some sharp snow-flurries,
and the pond was half frozen over. Then, in haste, the beavers brought
up a quantity of mud and grass roots, and plastered the domes of their
houses thickly till they no longer looked like heaps of sticks, but
rather resembled huge ant-hills. No sooner was this task done than, as
if the beavers had been notified of its coming, the real cold came.
In one night the pond froze to a depth of several inches; and over the
roof of the House in the Water was a casing of armour hard as stone.

The frost continued for several days, till the stone-like roof was a
good foot in thickness, as was the ice over the surface of the pond.
Then a thick, feather-soft, windless snow-fall, lasting twenty-four
hours, served as a blanket against the further piercing of the frost;
and the beavers, warm-housed, well-provisioned, and barricaded against
all their enemies but man, settled themselves down to their long
seclusion from the white, glittering, bitter, outside world.

When the winter had tightened its grip, this outside world was full of
perils. Hungry lynxes, foxes, and fishers ("black cat," the woodsman
called them) hunted through the silent and pallid aisles of the
forest. They all would have loved a meal of warm, fat beaver-meat; and
they all knew what these low, snow-covered mounds meant. In the roof
of each house the cunning builders had left several tiny, crooked
openings for ventilation, and the warm air steaming up through these
made little chimney holes in the snow above. To these, now and then,
when stung by the hunger-pangs, a lynx or fox would come, and sniff
with greedy longing at the appetizing aroma. Growing desperate, the
prowler would dig down, through perhaps three feet of snow, till he
reached the stony roof of the house. On this he would tear and scratch
furiously, but in vain. Nothing less than a pick-axe would break
through that stony defence; and the beavers, perhaps dimly aware of
the futile assault upon their walls, would go on calmly nibbling
birch-sticks in their safe, warm dark.

[Illustration: "HUNTED THROUGH THE SILENT AND PALLID AISLES OF THE
FOREST."]

Inside the house everything was clean and dry. All refuse from the
clean repasts of the family was scrupulously removed, and even the
entrances, far out in the pond, were kept free from litter. When food
was needed, a beaver would slip down into the dark water of the
tunnel, out into the glimmering light of the pond, and straight to the
brush pile. Selecting a suitable stick, he would tow it back to the
house, up the main entrance, and into the dry, dark chamber. When all
the tender bark was eaten off, the bare stick would be carried away
and deposited on the dam. It was an easy life; and the beavers grew
fat while all the rest of the wild kindreds, save the porcupine and
the bear, were growing lean with famine. There was absolutely nothing
to do but eat, sleep and take such exercise as they would by swimming
hither and thither at terrific speed beneath the silver armour of the
ice.

One night, however, there came to the pond an enemy of whose powers
they had never had experience. Wandering down from northwestward,
under the impulse of one of those migratory whims which sometimes give
the lie to statistics and tradition, came a sinister, dark,
slow-moving beast whose savage and crafty eyes took on a sudden flame
when they detected the white mound which hid the shore beaver-house.
The wolverene did not need that faint, almost invisible wisp of vapour
from the air-holes to tell him there were beavers below. He knew
something about beavers. His powerful forearms and mighty claws got
him to the bottom of the snow in a few seconds. Other hungry marauders
had done the same thing before, to find themselves as far off as ever
from their aim. But the wolverene was not to be balked so easily. His
cunning nose found the minute openings of the air-holes; and by
digging his claws into these little apertures he was able to put forth
his great strength and tear up some tiny fragments of frozen mud.

[Illustration: "A SINISTER, DARK, SLOW-MOVING BEAST."]

If he had had the patience to keep on at his strenuous task
unremittingly for, perhaps, twenty-four hours or more, it is
conceivable that this fierce digger might have succeeded in making his
way into the chamber. There was no such implacable purpose, however,
in his attack. In a very little while he would have desisted from what
he knew to be a vain undertaking. Even had he succeeded, the beavers
would have fled before he could reach them, and taken refuge in their
burrows under the bank. But while he was still engrossed, perhaps only
amusing himself with the thought of giving the dwellers in the house a
bad quarter of an hour, it chanced that a huge lynx came stealing
along through the shadows of the trees, which lay blue and spectral in
the white moonlight. He saw the hind quarters of some unknown animal
which was busy working out a problem which he himself had striven in
vain to solve. The strange animal was plainly smaller than himself.
Moreover, he was in a position to be taken at a disadvantage. Both
these points weighed with the lynx; and he was enraged at this
attempted poaching upon what he chose to regard as his preserves.
Creeping stealthily, stealthily forward, eyes aflame and belly to the
snow, he sprang with a huge bound that landed him, claws open,
squarely on the wolverene's hind quarters.

Instantly there arose a hideous screeching, growling, spitting and
snarling, which pierced even to the ears of the beavers and sent them
scurrying wildly to their burrows in the bank. Under ordinary
circumstances the wolverene, with his dauntless courage and tremendous
strength, would have given a good account of himself with any lynx
alive. But this time, caught with head down and very busy, he stood
small chance with his powerful and lightning-swift assailant. In a
very few minutes the lynx's eviscerating claws had fairly torn him to
shreds; and thus came to a sudden close the invasion of the
wolverene.

But meanwhile, from far over the hills, moving up from the lowlands
by the sea, approached a peril which the beavers did not dream of
and could find no ingenuity to evade. Two half-breed trappers,
semi-outlaws from the Northern Peninsula, in search of fresh
hunting-grounds, had come upon this rich region of ponds and dams.

[Illustration: "HE SPRANG WITH A HUGE BOUND THAT LANDED HIM, CLAWS OPEN,
SQUARELY ON THE WOLVERENE'S HIND QUARTERS."]




CHAPTER VIII

The Saving of Boy's Pond


WHEN, early in the winter, the lumbermen moved into these woods which
Jabe had cruised over, establishing their camp about two miles
down-stream from the spot where the Boy and the woodsman had had their
lean-to, Jabe came with them as boss of a gang. He had for the time
grown out of the mood for trapping. Furs were low, and there was a
"sight" more money for him in lumbering that winter. Popular with the
rest of the lumbermen--who most of them knew of the Boy and his
"queer" notions--Jabe had no difficulty in pledging them to respect
the sanctity of Boy's Pond and its inhabitants. In fact, in the
evenings around the red-hot stove, Jabe told such interesting stories
of what he and the Boy had seen together a few months before, that the
reckless, big-hearted, boisterously profane but sentimental woodsmen
were more than half inclined to declare the whole series of ponds
under the special protection of the camp. As for Boy's Pond, that
should be safe at any cost.

Not long after Christmas the Boy, taking advantage of the fact that
some fresh supplies were being sent out from the Settlement by team,
came to visit the camp. The head of the big lumber company which owned
these woods was a friend of the Boy's father, and the Boy himself was
welcome in any of the camps. His special purpose in coming now was to
see how his beavers got on in winter, and to assure himself that Jabe
had been able to protect them.

The morning after his arrival in camp he set out to visit the pond. He
went on snowshoes, of course, and carried his little Winchester as he
always did in the woods, holding tenaciously that the true lover of
peace should be ever prepared for war. The lumbermen had gone off to
work with the first of dawn; and far away to his right he heard the
axes ringing, faintly but crisply, on the biting morning air. For half
a mile he followed a solitary snowshoe trail, which he knew to be
Jabe's by the peculiar broad toe and long, trailing heel which Jabe
affected in snowshoes; and he wondered what his friend was doing in
this direction, so far from the rest of the choppers. Then Jabe's
track swerved off to the left, crossing the brook; and the Boy tramped
on over the unbroken snow.

The sound of the distant choppers soon died away, and he was alone in
the unearthly silence. The sun, not yet risen quite clear of the
hilltops, sent spectral, level, far-reaching gleams of thin
pink-and-saffron light down the alleys of the sheeted trees. The low
crunching of his snowshoes on the crisp snow sounded almost blatant in
the Boy's tensely listening ears. In spite of himself he began to
tread stealthily, as if the sound of his steps might bring some
ghostly enemy upon him from out of the whiteness.

Suddenly the sound of an axe came faintly to his ears from straight
ahead, where he knew no choppers were at work. He stopped short. That
axe was not striking wood. It was striking ice. It was chopping the
ice of Boy's Pond! What could it mean? There were no fish in that pond
to chop the ice for!

As he realized that some one was preparing to trap his beavers his
face flushed with anger, and he started forward at a run. That it was
no one from the camp he knew very well. It must be some strange
trapper who did not know that this pond was under protection. He
thought this out as he ran on; and his anger calmed down. Trappers
were a decent, understanding folk; and a word of explanation would
make things all right. There were plenty of other beaver ponds in that
neighbourhood.

Pressing through the white-draped ranks of the young fir-trees, he
came out suddenly upon the edge of the pond, and halted an instant in
irresolution. Two dark-visaged men--his quick eye knew them for
half-breeds--were busy on the snow about twenty paces above the low
mound which marked the main beaver house. They had a number of stakes
with them; and they were cutting a series of holes in a circle. From
what Jabe had told him of the Indian methods, he saw at once that
these were not regular trappers, but poachers, who were violating the
game laws and planning to annihilate the whole beaver colony by
fencing in its brush pile.

The Boy realized now that the situation was a delicate if not a
dangerous one. For an instant he thought of going back to camp for
help; but one of the men was on his knees, fixing the stakes, and the
other was already chopping what appeared to be the last hole. Delay
might mean the death of several of his precious beavers. Indignation
and compassion together urged him on, and his young face hardened in
unaccustomed lines.

Walking out upon the snow a little way, he halted, at a distance of
perhaps thirty paces from the poachers. At the sound of his snowshoes
the two men looked up scowling and apprehensive; and the kneeling one
sprang to his feet. They wanted no witnesses of their illegal work.

"Good morning," said the Boy politely.

At the sound of his soft young voice, the sight of his slender figure
and youthful face, their apprehensions vanished; but not their anger
at being discovered.

"Mornin'!" growled one, in a surly voice; while the other never opened
his mouth. Then they looked at each other with meaning question in
their eyes. How were they going to keep this unwelcome visitor from
betraying them?

"I'm going to ask you," said the Boy sweetly, "to be so kind as to
stop trapping on this pond. Of course you didn't know it, but this is
my pond, and there is no trapping allowed on it. It is reserved, you
know; and I don't want a single one of my beavers killed."

The man with the axe scowled fiercely and said nothing. But the other,
the one who had been driving the stakes, laughed in harsh derision.

"You don't, hey, sonny?" he answered. "Well, you just wait an' watch
us. We'll show ye whose beaver they be!" And turning his back in scorn
of his interlocutor's youth, he knelt down again to drive another
stake. The man who had not spoken, however, stood leaning on his axe,
eying the Boy with an ugly expression of menace.

The Boy's usually quiet blood was now pounding and tingling with
anger. His alert eyes had measured the whole situation, and noted that
the men had no firearms but their rifles, which were leaning against a
tree on the shore fully fifty yards behind them.

"Stop!" he cried, with so confident a tone of authority that the
kneeling man looked up, though with a sneer on his face. "Unless you
go away from this pond at once, I'll get the men from the camp, and
they'll make you go. They'll not be so polite as I am. You're just
poachers, anyway. And the boys will like as not just run you clean out
of the country. Will you do as I ask you, or shall I go and get
them?"

The man with the axe spat out some French curse which the Boy didn't
understand very clearly. But the man at the stakes jumped up again
with a dangerous grin.

"You'll stay right where you are, sonny, till we're done with you," he
snarled. "You understand? You're a-goin' to git hurt ef ye gits in our
way any! See?"

The Boy was now in a white rage; but he kept his wits cool and his
eyes watchful. He realized at this moment that he was in great danger;
but, his mettle being sound, this only made him the more resolute.

"All right. You've decided!" he said slowly. "We'll see what the boys
will have to say about it."

As he spoke he made a movement as if to turn, but without taking his
eyes from the enemy. The movement just served to swing his little
Winchester into a readier position.

At his first move the man with the axe took a step forward, and swung
up his axe with a peculiar gesture which the Boy understood. He had
seen the woodsmen throw their axes. He knew well their quickness and
their deadly precision. But quickness and precision with the little
Winchester were his own especial pride,--and, after all, he had not
turned any further than was just right for a good shot. Even as the
axe was on the verge of leaving the poacher's hand, the rifle cracked
sharply. The poacher yelled a curse, and his arm dropped. The axe flew
wide, landing nowhere near its aim. On the instant both the
half-breeds turned, and raced for their rifles on the shore.

"Stop, or I'll shoot you both!" shouted the Boy, now with embarrassment
added to his wrath. In their wild fury at being so balked by a boy,
both men trusted to his missing his aim--or to the hope that his gun
was not a repeater. They ignored his command, and rushed on. The Boy
was just going to shoot again, aiming at their legs; when, to his
amazement and inconceivable relief, out from behind the tree where the
poachers' rifles leaned, came Jabe.

Snatching up one of the guns, he echoed the Boy's command.

"Stop _right_ there!" he ordered curtly. "An' up with your hands,
too! Mebbe youse kin fling a knife slick ez ye kin an axe."

The half-breeds stood like stones. One held up both hands; but the
other only held up his left, his right being helpless. They knew there
was nothing to say. They were fairly caught. They were poaching. The
tall lumberman had seen the axe flung. Their case was a black one; and
any attempt to explain could do no less than make it worse. They did
not even dare to look at each other, but kept their narrow, beady eyes
fixed on Jabe's face.

The Boy came swiftly to Jabe's side.

"Neat shot!" said the woodsman; but the note of astonished admiration
in his tone was the most thrilling compliment the Boy had ever
received.

"What are you going to do with them, Jabe?" he inquired, mildly.

"That's fer you to say! They're yourn!" answered Jabe, keeping his
eyes on the prisoners.

The Boy looked the two culprits over carefully, with his calm, boyish
gaze. He was overwhelmingly elated, but would have died rather than
show it. His air was that of one who is quite used to capturing two
outlaws,--and having axes hurled at his head,--and putting bullets
through men's shoulders. He could not help feeling sorry for the man
with the bullet through his shoulder.

"Well, Jabe," he said presently, "we can't let them go with their
guns, because they're such sneaking brutes, they'd shoot us from
behind a tree. And we can't let them go without their guns, because we
can't be sure they wouldn't starve before they got to their own homes.
And we don't want to take them into camp, for the fellows would
probably treat them as they deserve,--and I don't want them to get
anything so bad as that!"

"Maybe it _might_ be better not to let the hands git hold of 'em!"
agreed Jabe. "They'd be rough!"

A gleam of hope came into the prisoners' eyes. The unwounded one
spoke. And he had the perspicacity to address himself to the Boy
rather than to Jabe, thereby conciliating the Boy appreciably.

"Let us go!" he petitioned, choking down his rage. "We'll swear to
quit, right now an' fer good; an' not to try to git back at yez!"

"Ye'll have to leave yer guns!" said Jabe sternly.

"They're the only guns we got; an' they're our livin', fer the
winter!" protested the half-breed, still looking at the Boy.

"If we take away their guns, what's the good of making them swear?"
demanded the Boy, stepping up and gazing into their eyes. "No, I
reckon if they give their oath, they'll stick to it. Where's your
camp, men?"

"Over yonder, about three mile!" answered the spokesman, nodding
toward the northeast.

"If we give you back your guns," went on the Boy gently, "will you
both give us your oath to clear right out of this country altogether,
and not trap at all this side of the line? And will you take oath,
also, that you will never, in any way, try to get even with either him
or me for having downed you this way?"

"Sartain!" responded the spokesman, with obvious sincerity. "I'll
swear to all that! An' I won't never _want_ to git even, if you use us
so gentlemanlike!"

"And will you swear, too?" inquired the Boy, turning to the silent one
who had thrown the axe at him. The fellow glared at him defiantly for
a moment, then glanced at his wounded arm, which hung limp at his
side. At last he answered with a sullen growl:

"Yes, I'll swear! Got to! Curse you!"

"Good!" said the Boy. "That's the best way for all of us. Jabe, will
you take their oaths. You know how better than I do!"

"All right!" responded the latter, shrugging his shoulders in a way
which said--"it's your idee, not mine!" Then he proceeded to bind each
man separately by an oath which left no loophole, and which was sealed
by all that their souls held sacred. This done, he handed back the
rifles,--and the two poachers, without a word, turned their backs and
made off at a swift lope straight up the open pond. The Boy and Jabe
watched them till they vanished among the trees. Then, with a shy
little laugh, the Boy picked up the axe which had been hurled at his
head.

"I'm glad he left me this," he murmured, "to kind of remember him
by!"

"The sneakin' skunk!" growled Jabe. "If I'd had my way, it'd be the
penitentiary for the both of 'em!"

That evening, when the whole story was told, the woodsmen were
indignant, for a time, because the half-breeds had been let go; but at
last they gave heed to Jabe's representations, and acknowledged that
the Boy's plan had saved a "sight of bother." To guard against future
difficulties, however, they took a big piece of smooth board, and
painted the following sign, to be nailed up on a conspicuous tree
beside the pond.

                                 NOTICE

                 THIS IS BOY'S POND. NO TRAPPING HERE.
               IF ANYBODY WANTS TO SAY, WHY NOT? LAWLER'S
                        CAMP WILL LET HIM KNOW.




THE WHITE-SLASHED BULL


HER back crushed beneath the massive weight of a "deadfall," the
mother moose lay slowly sobbing her life out on the sweet spring air.
The villainous log, weighted cunningly with rocks, had caught her just
above the withers, bearing her forward so that her forelegs were
doubled under her, and her neck outstretched so that she could not
lift her muzzle from the wet moss. Though her eyes were already
glazing, and her nostrils full of a blown and blood-streaked froth,
from time to time she would struggle desperately to raise her head,
for she yearned to lick the sprawling, wobbling legs of the ungainly
calf which stood close beside her, bewildered because she would not
rise and suckle him.

The dying animal lay in the middle of the trail, which was an old,
half-obliterated logger's road, running straight east into the glow of
the spring sunrise. The young birches and poplars, filmed with the
first of the green, crowded close upon the trail, with, here and
there, a rose-blooming maple, here and there, a sombre, black-green
hemlock, towering over the thick second growth. The early air was
fresh, but soft; fragrant with the breath of opening buds. Faint mists
streamed up into the sunlight along the mossy line of the trail, and
the only sounds breaking the silence of the wilderness were the
sweetly plaintive calls of two rain-birds, answering each other slowly
over the treetops. Everything in the scene--the tenderness of the
colour and the air, the responses of the mating birds, the hope and
the expectancy of all the waking world--seemed piteously at variance
with the anguish of the stricken mother and her young, down there in
the solitude of the trail.

Presently, in the undergrowth beside the trail, a few paces beyond the
deadfall, a twig snapped sharply. Admonished by that experience of a
thousand ancestral generations which is instinct, the calf lifted his
big awkward ears apprehensively, and with a shiver drew closer to his
mother's crushed body. A moment later a gaunt black bear thrust his
head and shoulders forth from the undergrowth, and surveyed the scene
with savage, but shrewd, little eyes. He was hungry, and to his
palate no other delicacy the spring wilderness could ever afford was
equal to a young moose calf. But the situation gave him pause. The
mother moose was evidently in a trap; and the bear was wary of all
traps. He sank back into the undergrowth, and crept noiselessly nearer
to reconnoitre. In his suspicious eyes even a calf might be dangerous
to tamper with, under such unusual conditions as these. As he vanished
the calf shuddered violently, and tried to climb upon his mother's
mangled body.

In a few seconds the bear's head appeared again, close by the base of
the deadfall. With crafty nose he sniffed at the great timber which
held the moose cow down. The calf was now almost within reach of the
deadly sweep of his paw; but the man-smell was strong on the deadfall,
and the bear was still suspicious. While he hesitated, from behind a
bend in the trail came a sound of footsteps. The bear knew the sound.
A man was coming. Yes, certainly there was some trick about it. With a
grunt of indignant disgust he shrank back again into the thicket and
fled stealthily from so dangerous a neighbourhood. Hungry as he was,
he had no wish to try conclusions with man.

The woodsman came striding down the trail hurriedly, rounded the turn,
and stopped abruptly. He understood at a glance the evil work of the
game poachers. With indignant pity, he stepped forward and drew a
merciful knife across the throat of the suffering beast. The calf
shrank away and stood staring at him anxiously, wavering between
terror and trust.

For a moment or two the man hesitated. Of one thing he was certain:
the poachers who had set the deadfall must not profit by their
success. Moreover, fresh moose-meat would not be unappreciated in his
backwoods cabin. He turned and retraced his steps at a run, fearing
lest some hungry spring marauders should arrive in his absence. And
the calf, more than ever terrified by his mother's unresponsiveness,
stared after him uneasily as he vanished.

For half an hour nothing happened. The early chill passed from the
air, a comforting warmth glowed down the trail, the two rain-birds
kept whistling to each other their long, persuasive, melancholy call,
and the calf stood motionless, waiting, with the patience of the wild,
for he knew not what. Then there came a clanking of chains, a
trampling of heavy feet, and around the turn appeared the man again,
with a pair of big brown horses harnessed to a drag-sled. The calf
backed away as the man approached, and watched with dull wonder as the
great log was rolled aside and his mother's limp, crushed form was
hoisted laboriously upon the sled. This accomplished, the man turned
and came to him gently, with hand outstretched. To run away would have
been to run away from the shelter of his mother's presence; so, with a
snort of apprehension, he submitted to being stroked and rubbed about
the ears and neck and throat. The sensation was curiously comforting,
and suddenly his fear vanished. With his long, mobile muzzle he began
to tug appealingly at a convenient fold of the man's woollen sleeve.
Smiling complacently at this sign of confidence, the man left him, and
started the team at a slow walk up the trail. With a hoarse bleat of
alarm, thinking he was about to be deserted, the calf followed after
the sled, his long legs wobbling awkwardly.

From the first moment that she set eyes upon him, shambling awkwardly
into the yard at her husband's heels, Jabe Smith's wife was
inhospitable toward the ungainly youngling of the wild. She
declared that he would take all the milk. And he did. For the next
two months she was unable to make any butter, and her opinions on
the subject were expressed without reserve. But Jabe was inflexible,
in his taciturn, backwoods way, and the calf, till he was old enough
to pasture, got all the milk he wanted. He grew and throve so
astonishingly that Jabe began to wonder if there was not some
mistake in the scheme of things, making cows' milk the proper
nutriment for moose calves. By autumn the youngster was so big and
sleek that he might almost have passed for a yearling.

Jabe Smith, lumberman, pioneer and guide, loved all animals, even
those which in the fierce joy of the hunt he loved to kill. The young
moose bull, however, was his peculiar favourite--partly, perhaps,
because of Mrs. Smith's relentless hostility to it. And the ungainly
youngster repaid his love with a devotion that promised to become
embarrassing. All around the farm he was for ever at his heels, like a
dog; and if, by any chance, he became separated from his idol, he
would make for him in a straight line, regardless of currant bushes,
bean rows, cabbage patches or clothes-lines. This strenuous directness
did not further endear him to Mrs. Smith. That good lady used to lie
awake at night, angrily devising schemes for getting rid of the "ugly
brute." These schemes of vengeance were such a safety-valve to her
injured feelings that she would at last make up her mind to content
herself with "takin' it out on the hide o' the critter" next day, with
a sound hickory stick. When next day came, however, and she went out
to milk, the youngster would shamble up to greet her with such amiable
trust in his eyes that her wrath would be, for the moment, disarmed,
and her fell purpose would fritter out in a futile "Scat, you brute!"
Then she would condone her weakness by thinking of what she would do
to the animal "some day."

That "some day," as luck would have it, came rather sooner than
she expected. From the first, the little moose had evinced a
determination to take up his abode in the kitchen, in his dread of
being separated from Jabe. Being a just man, Jabe had conceded at
once that his wife should have the choosing of her kitchen guests;
and, to avoid complications, he had rigged up a hinged bar across
the kitchen doorway, so that the door could safely stand open. When
the little bull was not at Jabe's heels, and did not know where to
find him, his favourite attitude was standing in front of the
kitchen door, his long nose thrust in as far as the bar would permit,
his long ears waving hopefully, his eyes intently on the mysterious
operations of Mrs. Jabe's housework. Though she would not have
acknowledged it for worlds, even to her inmost heart, the good woman
took much satisfaction out of that awkward, patient presence in the
doorway. When things went wrong with her, in that perverse way so
trying to the careful housewife, she could ease her feelings
wonderfully by expressing them without reserve to the young moose, who
never looked amused or attempted to answer back.

But one day, as it chanced, her feelings claimed a more violent
easement--and got it. She was scrubbing the kitchen floor. Just in the
doorway stood the scrubbing-pail, full of dirty suds. On a chair close
by stood a dish of eggs. The moose calf was nowhere in sight, and the
bar was down. Tired and hot, she got up from her aching knees and went
over to the stove to see if the pot was boiling, ready to make fresh
suds.

At this moment the young bull, who had been searching in vain all over
the farm for Jabe, came up to the door with a silent, shambling rush.
The bar was down. Surely, then, Jabe was inside! Overjoyed at the
opportunity he lurched his long legs over the threshold. Instantly his
great, loose hoofs slid on the slippery floor, and he came down
sprawling, striking the pail of dirty suds as he fell. With a seething
souse the slops went abroad, all over the floor. At the same time the
bouncing pail struck the chair, turned it over, and sent the dish of
eggs crashing in every direction.

For one second Mrs. Jabe stared rigidly at the mess of eggs, suds and
broken china, at the startled calf struggling to his feet. Then, with
a hysterical scream, she turned, snatched the boiling pot from the
stove, and hurled it blindly at the author of all mischief.

Happily for the blunderer, Mrs. Jabe's rage was so unbridled that she
really tried to hit the object of it. Therefore, she missed. The pot
went crashing through the leg of a table and shivered to atoms against
the log wall, contributing its full share to the discouraging mess on
the floor. But, as it whirled past, a great wedge of the boiling water
leaped out over the rim, flew off at a tangent, and caught the
floundering calf full in the side, in a long flare down from the tip
of the left shoulder. The scalding fluid seemed to cling in the
short, fine hair almost like an oil. With a loud bleat of pain the
calf shot to his feet and went galloping around the yard. Mrs. Jabe
rushed to the door, and stared at him wide-eyed. In a moment her
senses came back to her, and she realized what a hideous thing she had
done. Next she remembered Jabe--and what he would think of it!

Then, indeed, her conscience awoke in earnest, and a wholesome dread
enlivened her remorse. Forgetting altogether the state of her kitchen,
she rushed through the slop to the flour-barrel. Flour, she had always
heard, was the thing for burns and scalds. The pesky calf should be
treated right, if it took the whole barrel. Scooping up an extravagant
dishpanful of the white, powdery stuff, and recklessly spilling a lot
of it to add to the mixture on the floor, she rushed out into the yard
to apply her treatment, and, if possible, poultice her conscience.

The young moose, anguished and bewildered, had at last taken refuge in
the darkest corner of the stable. As Mrs. Jabe approached with her pan
of flour, he stood staring and shaking, but made no effort to avoid
her, which touched the over-impetuous dame to a fresh pang of
penitence. She did not know that the stupid youngster had quite failed
to associate her in any way with his suffering. It was only the
pot--the big, black thing which had so inexplicably come bounding at
him--that he blamed. From Mrs. Jabe's hands he expected some kind of
consolation.

In the gloom of the stall Mrs. Jabe could not see the extent of the
calf's injury. "Mebbe the water wasn't _quite_ bilin'!" she murmured
hopefully, coaxing and dragging the youngster forth into the light.
The hope, however, proved vain as brief. In a long streak down behind
the shoulder the hair was already slipping off.

"Sarved ye right!" she grumbled remorsefully, as with gentle fingers
she began sifting the flour up and down over the wound. The light
stuff seemed to soothe the anguish for the moment, and the sufferer
stood quite still till the scald was thoroughly covered with a
tenacious white cake. Then a fresh and fiercer pang seized the wound.
With a bleat he tore himself away, and rushed off, tail in air, across
the stump-pasture and into the woods.

"Mebbe he won't come back, and then Jabe won't never need to know!"
soliloquized Mrs. Jabe, returning to clean up her kitchen.

The sufferer returned, however, early in the afternoon, and was in his
customary attitude before the door when Jabe, a little later, came
back also. The long white slash down his favourite's side caught the
woodsman's eye at once. He looked at it critically, touched the flour
with tentative finger-tips, then turned on his wife a look of poignant
interrogation. But Mrs. Jabe was ready for him. Her nerve had
recovered. The fact that her victim showed no fear of her had
gradually reassured her. What Jabe didn't know would never hurt him,
she mused.

"Yes, yer pesky brat come stumblin' into the kitchen when the bar was
down, a-lookin' for ye. An' he upset the bilin' water I was goin' to
scrub with, an' broke the pot. An' I've got to have a new pot right
off, Jabe Smith--mind that!"

"Scalded himself pretty bad!" remarked Jabe. "Poor little beggar!"

"I done the best _I_ know'd how fer him!" said his wife with an
injured air. "Wasted most a quart o' good flour on his worthless hide!
Wish't he'd broke his neck 'stead of the only pot I got that's big
enough to bile the pig's feed in!"

"Well, you done jest about right, I reckon, Mandy," replied Jabe,
ashamed of his suspicions. "I'll go in to the Cross Roads an' git ye a
new pot to-morrer, an' some tar for the scald. The tar'll be better'n
flour, an' keep the flies off."

"I s'pose some men _ain't_ got nothin' better to do than be doctorin'
up a fool moose calf!" assented Mrs. Jabe promptly, with a snort of
censorious resignation.

Whether because the flour and the tar had virtues, or because the
clean flesh of the wild kindreds makes all haste to purge itself of
ills, it was not long before the scald was perfectly healed. But the
reminder of it remained ineffaceable--a long, white slash down across
the brown hide of the young bull, from the tip of the left fore
shoulder.

Throughout the winter the young moose contentedly occupied the
cow-stable, with the two cows and the yoke of red oxen. He throve on
the fare Jabe provided for him--good meadow hay with armfuls of
"browse" cut from the birch, poplar and cherry thickets. Jabe trained
him to haul a pung, finding him slower to learn than a horse, but
making up for his dulness by his docility. He had to be driven with a
snaffle, refusing absolutely to admit a bit between his teeth; and,
with the best good-will in the world, he could never be taught to
allow for the pung or sled to which he was harnessed. If left alone
for a moment he would walk over fences with it, or through the most
tangled thickets, if thereby seemed the most direct way to reach Jabe;
and once, when Jabe, vaingloriously and at great speed, drove him in
to the Cross Roads, he smashed the vehicle to kindling-wood in the
amiable determination to follow his master into the Cross Roads store.
On this occasion also he made himself respected, but unpopular, by
killing, with one lightning stroke of a great fore hoof, a huge
mongrel mastiff belonging to the storekeeper. The mastiff had sprung
out at him wantonly, resenting his peculiar appearance. But the
storekeeper had been so aggrieved that Jabe had felt constrained to
mollify him with a five-dollar bill. He decided, therefore, that his
favourite's value was as a luxury, rather than a utility; and the
young bull was put no more to the practices of a horse. Jabe had
driven a bull moose in harness, and all the settlement could swear to
it. The glory was all his.

By early summer the young bull was a tremendous, long-legged,
high-shouldered beast, so big, so awkward, so friendly, and so sure
of everybody's good-will that everybody but Jabe was terribly afraid
of him. He had no conception of the purposes of a fence; and he could
not be taught that a garden was not meant for him to lie down in. As
the summer advanced, and the young bull's stature with it, Jabe Smith
began to realize that his favourite was an expensive and sometimes
embarrassing luxury. Nevertheless, when September brought budding
spikes of horns and a strange new restlessness to the stalwart
youngster, and the first full moon of October lured him one night away
from the farm on a quest which he could but blindly follow, Jabe was
inconsolable.

"He ain't no more'n a calf yet, big as he is!" fretted Jabe. "He'll be
gittin' himself shot, the fool. Or mebbe some old bull'll be after
givin' him a lickin' fer interferin', and he'll come home to us!"

To which his wife retorted with calm superiority: "Ye're a bigger
fool'n even I took ye fer, Jabe Smith."

But the young bull did not come back that winter, nor the following
summer, nor the next year, nor the next. Neither did any Indian or
hunter or lumberman have anything to report as to a bull moose of
great stature, with a long white slash down his side. Either his quest
had carried him far to other and alien ranges, or some fatal mischance
of the wild had overtaken his inexperience. The latter was Jabe's
belief, and he concluded that his ungainly favourite had too soon
taken the long trail for the Red Men's land of ghosts.

Though Jabe Smith was primarily a lumberman and backwoods farmer, he
was also a hunter's guide, so expert that his services in this
direction were not to be obtained without very special inducement. At
"calling" moose he was acknowledged to have no rival. When he laid his
grimly-humourous lips to the long tube of birch-bark, which is the
"caller's" instrument of illusion, there would come from it a strange
sound, great and grotesque, harsh yet appealing, rude yet subtle, and
mysterious as if the uncomprehended wilderness had itself found voice.
Old hunters, wise in all woodcraft, had been deceived by the
sound--and much more easily the impetuous bull, waiting, high-antlered
and eager, for the love-call of his mate to summon him down the shore
of the still and moon-tranced lake.

When a certain Famous Hunter, whose heart took pride in horns and
heads and hides--the trophies won by his unerring rifle in all four
corners of earth--found his way at last to the tumbled wilderness that
lies about the headwaters of the Quah Davic, it was naturally one of
the great New Brunswick moose that he was after. Nothing but the
noblest antlers that New Brunswick forests bred could seem to him
worthy of a place on those walls of his, whence the surly front of a
musk-ox of the Barren Grounds glared stolid defiance to the snarl of
an Orinoco jaguar, and the black, colossal head of a Kadiak bear was
eyed derisively by the monstrous and malignant mask of a two-horned
rhinoceros. With such a quest upon him, the Famous Hunter came, and
naturally sought the guidance of Jabe Smith, whom he lured from the
tamer distractions of a "timber cruise" by double pay and the pledge
of an extravagant bonus if the quest should be successful.

The lake, lying low between its wooded hills, was like a glimmering
mirror in the misty October twilight when Jabe and the Famous Hunter
crept stealthily down to it. In a dense covert beside the water's edge
they hid themselves. Beside them stretched the open ribbon of a narrow
water-meadow, through which a slim brook, tinkling faintly over its
pebbles, slipped out into the stillness. Just beyond the mouth of the
brook a low, bare spit of sand jutted forth darkly upon the pale
surface of the lake.

[Illustration: "IT WAS NOT UNTIL THE MOON APPEARED ... THAT JABE BEGAN TO
CALL."]

It was not until the moon appeared--a red, ominous segment of a
disk--over the black and rugged ridge of the hills across the lake,
that Jabe began to call. Three times he set the hollow birch-bark to
his mouth, and sent the hoarse, appealing summons echoing over the
water. And the man, crouching invisible in the thick shadow beside
him, felt a thrill in his nerves, a prickling in his cheeks, at that
mysterious cry, which seemed to him to have something almost of menace
in its lure. Even so, he thought, might Pan have summoned his
followers, shaggy and dangerous, yet half divine, to some symbolic
revel.

The call evoked no answer of any kind. Jabe waited till the moon,
still red and distorted, had risen almost clear of the ridge. Then he
called again, and yet again, and again waited. From straight across
the strangely-shadowed water came a sudden sharp crashing of
underbrush, as if some one had fallen to beating the bushes furiously
with sticks.

"That's him!" whispered Jabe. "An' he's a big one, sure!"

The words were not yet out of his mouth when there arose a most
startling commotion in the thicket close behind them, and both men
swung around like lightning, jerking up their rifles. At the same
instant came an elusive whiff of pungency on the chill.

"Pooh! only a bear!" muttered Jabe, as the commotion retreated in
haste.

"Why, he was close upon us!" remarked the visitor. "I could have poked
him with my gun! Had he any special business with us, do you
suppose?"

"Took me for a cow moose, an' was jest a-goin' to swipe me!" answered
Jabe, rather elated at the compliment which the bear had paid to his
counterfeit.

The Famous Hunter drew a breath of profound satisfaction.

"I'll be hanged," he whispered, "if your amiable New Brunswick
backwoods can't get up a thrill quite worthy of the African jungle!"

"St!" admonished Jabe. "He's a-comin'. An' mad, too! Thinks that
racket was another bull, gittin' ahead of 'im. Don't ye _breathe_ now,
no more!" And raising the long bark, he called through it again, this
time more softly, more enticingly, but always with that indescribable
wildness, shyness and roughness rasping strangely through the note.
The hurried approach of the bull could be followed clearly around the
head of the lake. It stopped, and Jabe called again. In a minute or
two there came a brief, explosive, grunting reply--this time from a
point much nearer. The great bull had stopped his crashing progress
and was slipping his vast, impetuous bulk through the underbrush as
noiselessly as a weasel. The stillness was so perfect after that one
echoing response that the Famous Hunter turned a look of interrogation
upon Jabe's shadowy face. The latter breathed almost inaudibly: "He's
a-comin'. He's nigh here!" And the hunter clutched his rifle with that
fine, final thrill of unparalleled anticipation.

The moon was now well up, clear of the treetops and the discolouring
mists, hanging round and honey-yellow over the hump of the ridge. The
magic of the night deepened swiftly. The sandspit and the little
water-meadow stood forth unshadowed in the spectral glare. Far out in
the shine of the lake a fish jumped, splashing sharply. Then a twig
snapped in the dense growth beyond the water-meadow. Jabe furtively
lifted the bark, and mumbled in it caressingly. The next moment--so
suddenly and silently that it seemed as if he had taken instant shape
in the moonlight--appeared a gigantic moose, standing in the meadow,
his head held high, his nostrils sniffing arrogant inquiry. The
broadly-palmated antlers crowning his mighty head were of a spread and
symmetry such as Jabe had never even imagined.

Almost imperceptibly the Hunter raised his rifle--a slender shadow
moving in paler shadows. The great bull, gazing about expectantly for
the mate who had called, stood superb and indomitable, ghost-gray in
the moonlight, a mark no tyro could miss. A cherry branch intervened,
obscuring the foresight of the Hunter's rifle. The Hunter shifted his
position furtively. His crooked finger was just about to tighten on
the trigger. At this moment, when the very night hung stiller as if
with a sense of crisis, the giant bull turned, exposing his left flank
to the full glare of the moonlight. Something gleamed silver down his
side, as if it were a shining belt thrown across his shoulder.

[Illustration: "SOMETHING GLEAMED SILVER DOWN HIS SIDE."]

With a sort of hiss from between his teeth Jabe shot out his long arm
and knocked up the barrel of the rifle. In the same instant the
Hunter's finger had closed on the trigger. The report rang out,
shattering the night; the bullet whined away high over the treetops,
and the great bull, springing at one bound far back into the thickets,
vanished like an hallucination.

Jabe stood forth into the open, his gaunt face working with suppressed
excitement. The Hunter followed, speechless for a moment between
amazement, wrath and disappointment. At last he found voice, and quite
forgot his wonted courtesy.

"D--n you!" he stammered. "What do you mean by that? What in----"

But Jabe, suddenly calm, turned and eyed him with a steadying gaze.

"Quit all that, now!" he retorted crisply. "I knowed _jest_ what I was
doin'! I knowed that bull when he were a leetle, awkward staggerer. I
brung him up on a bottle; an' I loved him. He skun out four years ago.
I'd most ruther 'ave seen _you_ shot than that ther' bull, I tell
ye!"

The Famous Hunter looked sour; but he was beginning to understand the
situation, and his anger died down. As he considered, Jabe, too,
began to see the other side of the situation.

"I'm right sorry to disapp'int ye so!" he went on apologetically.
"We'll hev to call off this deal atween you an' me, I reckon. An'
there ain't goin' to be no more shooting over _this_ range, if I kin
help it--an' I guess I kin!--till I kin git that ther' white-slashed
bull drove away back over on to the Upsalquitch, where the hunters
won't fall foul of him! But I'll git ye another guide, jest as good as
me, or better, what ain't got no particular friends runnin' loose in
the woods to bother 'im. An' I'll send ye 'way down on to the Sevogle,
where ther's as big heads to be shot as ever have been. I can't do
more."

"Yes, you can!" declared the Famous Hunter, who had quite recovered
his self-possession.

"What is it?" asked Jabe doubtfully.

"You can pardon me for losing my temper and swearing at you!" answered
the Famous Hunter, holding out his hand. "I'm glad I didn't knock over
your magnificent friend. It's good for the breed that he got off. But
you'll have to find me something peculiarly special now, down on that
Sevogle."




WHEN THE BLUEBERRIES ARE RIPE


THE steep, rounded, rock-scarred face of Bald Mountain, for all its
naked grimness, looked very cheerful in the last of the warm-coloured
sunset. There were no trees; but every little hollow, every tiny
plateau, every bit of slope that was not too steep for clinging roots
to find hold, was clothed with a mat of blueberry bushes. The berries,
of an opaque violet-blue tone (much more vivid and higher in key than
the same berries can show when picked and brought to market) were so
large and so thickly crowded as to almost hide the leaves. They gave
the austere steeps of "Old Baldy" the effect of having been dyed with
a wash of cobalt.

Far below, where the lonely wilderness valley was already forsaken
by the sun, a flock of ducks could be seen, with long, outstretched
necks rigid and short wings swiftly beating, lined out over a
breadth of wild meadow. Above the lake which washed the foot of
the mountain,--high above the water, but below the line of shadow
creeping up the mountain's face,--a single fish-hawk circled
slowly, waiting for the twilight coolness to bring the big trout to
the surface to feed. The smooth water glimmered pallidly, and here
and there a spreading, circular ripple showed that the hungry fish
were beginning to rise.

Up in the flood of the sunset, the blueberries basked and glowed, some
looking like gems, some like blossoms, according to the fall of the
light. Around the shoulder of the mountain toward the east, where the
direct rays of the sun could not reach, the light was yet abundant,
but cool and tender,--and here the vivid berries were beginning to
lose their colour, as a curved moon, just rising over the far, ragged
rim of the forest, touched them with phantom silver. Everywhere
jutting rocks and sharp crevices broke the soft mantle of the
blueberry thickets; and on the southerly slope, where sunset and
moonrise mingled with intricate shadows, everything looked ghostlike
and unreal. On the utmost summit of the mountain a rounded peak of
white granite, smoothed by ages of storm, shone like a beacon.

[Illustration: "AN OLD SHE-BEAR WITH TWO HALF-GROWN CUBS."]

The only berry-pickers that came to these high slopes of Bald Mountain
were the wild kindreds, furred and feathered. Of them all, none were
more enthusiastic and assiduous than the bears; and just now, climbing
up eagerly from the darkening woods below, came an old she-bear with
two half-grown cubs. They came up by easy paths, zigzagging past
boulder and crevice, through the ghostly, noiseless contention of
sunlight and moonlight. Now their moving shadows lay one way, now the
other; and now their shadows were suddenly wiped out, as the two
lights for a moment held an even balance. At length having reached a
little plateau where the berries were particularly large and
close-clustered, the old bear stopped, and they fell joyously to their
feeding.

On these open heights there were no enemies to keep watch against, and
there was no reason to be wary or silent. The bears fed noisily,
therefore, stripping the plump fruit cleverly by the pawful, and
munching with little, greedy grunts of delight. There was no other
food quite so to their taste as these berries, unless, perhaps, a
well-filled honey-comb. And this was their season for eating, eating,
eating, all the time, in order to lay up abundant fat against the long
severity of winter.

As the bushes about them were stripped of the best fruit, the shaggy
feasters moved around the shoulder of the mountain from the gold of
the sun into the silver of the moon. Soon the sunset had faded, and
the moon had it all her own way except for a broad expanse of
sea-green sky in the west, deepening through violet to a narrow streak
of copper on the horizon. By this time the shadows, especially on the
eastern slope, were very sharp and black, and the open spaces very
white and radiant, with a strange transparency borrowed from that
high, pure atmosphere.

It chanced that the little hollow on which the bears were just now
revelling,--a hollow where the blueberries were unbelievably large and
abundant--was bounded on its upper side, toward the steep, by a narrow
and deep crevice. At one end of the cleft, from a rocky and shallow
roothold, a gnarled birch grew slantingly. From its unusual situation,
and from the fact that the bushes grew thick to its very edge, this
crevice constituted nothing less than a most insidious trap.

One of the cubs, born with the instinct of caution, kept far away from
the dangerous brink without having more than half realized that there
was any danger there whatever. The other cub was one of those
blundering fellows, to be found among the wild kindreds no less than
among the kindreds of men, who only get caution hammered into them by
experience. He saw a narrow break, indeed, between the berry patch and
the bare steep above,--but what was a little crevice in a position
like this, where it could not amount to anything? Had it been on the
other side of the hollow, he would have feared a precipice, and would
have been on his guard. But, as it was, he never gave the matter a
second thought, because it did not look dangerous! He found the best
berries growing very near the edge of the crevice; and in his
satisfaction he turned his back to the height and settled himself
solidly upon his haunches to enjoy them. As he did so the bushes gave
way behind him, he pitched abruptly backwards, and vanished with a
squeal of terror into the narrow cleft of darkness.

The crevice was perhaps twelve feet deep, and from five to eight in
width all the way to the bottom. The bottom held a layer of earth and
dead leaves, which served to ease the cub's fall; but when he landed
the wind was so bumped out of him that for a minute or two he could
not utter a sound. As soon as he recovered his voice, however, he
began to squeal and whine piteously for his mother.

The old bear, at the sound of his cry as he fell, had rushed so
hastily to his aid that she barely escaped falling in after him.
Checking herself just in time, by digging all her mighty claws into
the roots of the blueberries, she crouched at the brink, thrust her
head as far over as she could, and peered down with anxious cries. But
when the cub's voice came back to her from the darkness she knew he
was not killed, and she also knew that he was very near,--and her
whinings changed at once to a guttural murmur that must have been
intended for encouragement. The other cub, meanwhile, had come
lumbering up with ears wisely cocked, taken a very hasty and careful
glance over the edge, and returned to his blueberries with an air of
disapproval. It was as if he said he always knew that blundering
brother of his would get himself into trouble.

For some minutes the old bear crouched where she was, straining her
eyes to make out the form of her little one. Becoming accustomed to
the gloom at last, she could discern him. She could see that he was
moving about, and standing on his hind legs, and striving valiantly to
claw his way up the perpendicular surface of smooth rock. She began to
reach downwards first one big forepaw and then the other, testing the
rock beneath her for some ledge or crack that might give her foothold
by which to climb down to his aid. Finding none, she again set up her
uneasy whining, and moved slowly along the brink, trying every inch of
the way for some place rough enough to give her strong claws a chance
to take hold. In the full, unclouded light of the white moon she was a
pathetic figure, bending and crouching and straining, and reaching
down longingly, then stopping to listen to the complaints of pain and
terror that came up out of the dark.

At last she came to the end of the crevice where grew the solitary
birch tree,--the frightened captive following exactly below her and
stretching up toward her against the rock. At this point, close beside
the tree, some roots and tough turf overhung the edge, and the old
bear's paws detected a roughness on the face of the rock just below.
This was enough for her brave and devoted heart. She turned around and
let her hind quarters carefully over the brink, intending to climb
down backwards as bears do. But beyond the first unevenness there was
absolutely nothing that her claws could take hold of. Her great body
was half way over, when she felt herself on the point of falling.
Making a sudden startled effort to recover herself, she clutched
desperately at the trunk of the birch tree with one arm, at the roots
of the berry-bushes with the other,--and just managed to regain the
level.

For herself, this mighty effort was just enough. But for the
birch-tree it was just too much. The shallow earth by which it held
gave way; and the next moment, with a clatter of loosened stones and a
swish of leafy branches, it crashed majestically down into the
crevice, closing one end of it with a mass of boughs and foliage, and
once more frightening the imprisoned cub almost out of his senses.

At the first sound of this cataclysm, at the first rattle of loose
earth about his ears, the cub had bounced madly to the other end of
the crevice, where he crouched, whimpering. The old bear, too, was
daunted for some seconds; but then, seeing that the cub was not hurt,
she was quick to perceive the advantage of the accident. Standing at
the upturned roots of the tree, she called eagerly and encouragingly
to the cub, pointing out the path of escape thus offered to him. For
some minutes he was too terrified to approach. At last she set her own
weight on the trunk, testing it, and prepared to climb down and lead
him out. At this, however, the youngster's nerve revived. With a
joyful and understanding squeal, he rushed forward, sprawled and
clawed his way over the tangle of branches, gained the firm
trunk,--and presently found himself again beside his mother among the
pleasant, moonlit berry-bushes. Here he was fondled and nosed and
licked and nursed by the delighted mother, till his bruised little
body forgot its hurts and his shaken little heart its fears. His
cautious brother, too, came up with a wise look and sniffed at him
patronizingly; but went away again with his nose in the air, as if to
say that here was much fuss being made over a very small matter.




THE GLUTTON OF THE GREAT SNOW


I

NORTHWARD interminably, and beneath a whitish, desolate sky, stretched
the white, empty leagues of snow, unbroken by rock or tree or hill, to
the straight, menacing horizon. Green-black, and splotched with snow
that clung here and there upon their branches, along the southward
limits of the barren crowded down the serried ranks of the ancient fir
forest. Endlessly baffled, but endlessly unconquered, the hosts of the
firs thrust out their grim spire-topped vanguards, at intervals, into
the hostile vacancy of the barren. Between these dark vanguards, long,
silent aisles of whiteness led back and gently upward into the heart
of the forest.

Out across one of these pale corridors of silence came moving very
deliberately a dark, squat shape with blunt muzzle close to the snow.
Its keen, fierce eyes and keener nostrils were scrutinizing the white
surface for the scent or trail of some other forest wanderer.
Conscious of power, in spite of its comparatively small stature--much
less than that of wolf or lynx, or even of the fox--it made no effort
to conceal its movements, disguise its track or keep watch for
possible enemies. Stronger than any other beast of thrice its size, as
cunning as the wisest of the foxes, and of a dogged, savage temper
well known to all the kindred of the wild, it seemed to feel secure
from ill-considered interference.

Less than three feet in length, but of peculiarly massive build, this
dark, ominous-looking animal walked flat-footed, like a bear, and with
a surly heaviness worthy of a bear's stature. Its fur, coarse and
long, was of a sooty gray-brown, streaked coarsely down each flank
with a broad yellowish splash meeting over the hind quarters. Its
powerful, heavy-clawed feet were black. Its short muzzle and massive
jaw, and its broad face up to just above the eyes, where the fur came
down thickly, were black also. The eyes themselves, peering out
beneath overhanging brows, gleamed with a mixture of sullen
intelligence and implacable savagery. In its slow, forbidding
strength, and in its tameless reserve, which yet held the capacity for
outbursts of ungovernable rage, this strange beast seemed to incarnate
the very spirit of the bitter and indomitable North. Its name was
various, for hunters called it sometimes wolverene, sometimes
carcajou, but oftener "Glutton," or "Injun Devil."

Through the voiceless desolation the carcajou--it was a female--continued
her leisurely way. Presently, just upon the edge of the forest-growth,
she came upon the fresh track of a huge lynx. The prints of the lynx's
great pads were several times broader than her own, but she stopped
and began to examine them without the slightest trace of apprehension. For
some reason best known to herself, she at length made up her mind to
pursue the stranger's back trail, concerning herself rather with what
he had been doing than with what he was about to do.

Plunging into the gloom of the firs, where the trail led over a
snow-covered chaos of boulders and tangled windfalls, she came
presently to a spot where the snow was disturbed and scratched. Her
eyes sparkled greedily. There were spatters of blood about the place,
and she realized that here the lynx had buried, for a future meal,
the remnant of his kill.

Her keen nose speedily told her just where the treasure was hidden,
and she fell to digging furiously with her short, powerful fore paws.
It was a bitter and lean season, and the lynx, after eating his fill,
had taken care to bury the remnant deep. The carcajou burrowed down
till only the tip of her dingy tail was visible before she found the
object of her search. It proved to be nothing but one hind quarter of
a little blue fox. Angrily she dragged it forth and bolted it in a
twinkling, crunching the slim bone between her powerful jaws. It was
but a morsel to such a hunger as hers. Licking her chops, and passing
her black paws hurriedly over her face, as a cat does, she forsook the
trail of the lynx and wandered on deeper into the soundless gloom.
Several rabbit-tracks she crossed, and here and there the dainty trail
of a ptarmigan, or the small, sequential dots of a weasel's foot. But
a single glance or passing twitch of her nostril told her these were
all old, and she vouchsafed them no attention. It was not till she had
gone perhaps a quarter of a mile through the fir-glooms that she came
upon a trail which caused her to halt.

It was the one trail, this, among all the tracks that traversed the
great snow, which could cause her a moment's perturbation. For the
trail of the wolf-pack she had small concern--for the hungriest wolves
could never climb a tree. But this was the broad snowshoe trail, which
she knew was made by a creature even more crafty than herself. She
glanced about keenly, peering under the trees--because one could never
judge, merely by the direction of the trail, where one of those
dangerous creatures was going. She stood almost erect on her haunches
and sniffed the air for the slightest taint of danger. Then she
sniffed at the tracks. The man-smell was strong upon them, and
comparatively, but not dangerously, fresh. Reassured on this point,
she decided to follow the man and find out what he was doing. It was
only when she did not know what he was about that she so dreaded him.
Given the opportunity to watch him unseen, she was willing enough to
pit her cunning against his, and to rob him as audaciously as she
would rob any of the wilderness kindreds.

Hunting over a wide range as she did, the carcajou was unaware till
now that a man had come upon her range that winter. To her experience
a man meant a hunter--and--trapper, with emphasis distinctly upon the
trapper. The man's gun she feared--but his traps she feared not at
all. Indeed, she regarded them rather with distinct favour, and was
ready to profit by them at the first opportunity. Having only strength
and cunning, but no speed to rely upon, she had learned that traps
could catch all kinds of swift creatures, and hold them inexorably.
She had learned, too, that there was usually a succession of traps and
snares set along a man's trail. It was with some exciting expectation,
now, that she applied herself to following this trail.

Within a short distance the track brought her to a patch of trampled
snow, with tiny bits of frozen fish scattered about. She knew at once
that somewhere in this disturbed area a trap was hidden, close to the
surface. Stepping warily, in a circle, she picked up and devoured the
smallest scraps. Near the centre lay a fragment of tempting size; but
she cunningly guessed that close beside that morsel would be the
hiding-place of the trap. Slowly she closed in upon it, her nose close
to the snow, sniffing with cautious discrimination. Suddenly she
stopped short. Through the snow she had detected the man-smell, and
the smell of steel, mingling with the savour of the dried fish. Here,
but a little to one side, she began to dig, and promptly uncovered a
light chain. Following this she came presently to the trap itself,
which she cautiously laid bare. Then, without misgiving, she ate the
big piece of fish. Both her curiosity and her hunger, however, were
still far from satisfied, so she again took up the trail.

The next trap she came to was an open snare--a noose of bright wire
suspended near the head of a cunningly constructed alley of fir
branches, leading up to the foot of a big hemlock. Just behind this
noose, and hardly to be reached save through the noose, the bait had
evidently been fixed. But the carcajou saw that some one little less
cunning than herself had been before her. Such a snare would have
caught the fierce, but rather stupid, lynx; but a fox had been the
first arrival. She saw his tracks. He had carefully investigated the
alley of fir branches from the outside. Then he had broken through it
behind the noose, and safely made off with the bait. Rather
contemptuously the old wolverene went on. She did not understand this
kind of trap, so she discreetly refrained from meddling with it.

[Illustration: "CREPT SLOWLY AROUND THE RAGING AND SNARLING CAPTIVE."]

Fully a quarter mile she had to go before she came to another; but
here she found things altogether different and more interesting. As
she came softly around a great snow-draped boulder there was a snarl,
a sharp rattle of steel, and a thud. She shrank back swiftly, just
beyond reach of the claws of a big lynx. The lynx had been ahead of
her in discovering the trap, and with the stupidity of his tribe had
got caught in it. The inexorable steel jaws had him fast by the left
fore leg. He had heard the almost soundless approach of the strange
prowler, and, mad with pain and rage, had sprung to the attack without
waiting to see the nature of his antagonist.

Keeping just beyond the range of his hampered leap, the carcajou now
crept slowly around the raging and snarling captive, who kept pouncing
at her in futile fury every other moment. Though his superior in sheer
strength, she was much smaller and lighter than he, and less
murderously armed for combat; and she dreaded the raking, eviscerating
clutch of his terrible hinder claws. In defence of her burrow and her
litter, she would have tackled him without hesitation; but her sharp
teeth and bulldog jaw, however efficient, would not avail, in such a
combat, to save her from getting ripped almost to ribbons. She was far
too sagacious to enter upon any such struggle unnecessarily. Prowling
slowly and tirelessly, without effort, around and around the excited
prisoner, she trusted to wear him out and then take him at some deadly
disadvantage.

Weighted with the trap, and not wise enough to refrain from wasting
his strength in vain struggles, the lynx was strenuously playing his
cunning antagonist's game, when a sound came floating on the still air
which made them both instantly rigid. It was a long, thin, wavering
cry that died off with indescribable melancholy in its cadence. The
lynx crouched, with eyes dilating, and listened with terrible
intentness. The carcajou, equally interested but not terrified, stood
erect, ears, eyes and nose alike directed to finding out more about
that ominous voice. Again and again it was repeated, swiftly coming
nearer; and presently it resolved itself into a chorus of voices. The
lynx made several convulsive bounds, wrenching desperately to free his
imprisoned limb; then, recognizing the inevitable, he crouched again,
shuddering but dangerous, his tufted ears flattened upon his back,
his eyes flickering green, every tooth and claw bared for the last
battle. But the carcajou merely stiffened up her fur, in a rage at the
prospective interruption of her hunting. She knew well that the
dreadful, melancholy cry was the voice of the wolf-pack. But the
wolves were not on _her_ trail, that she was sure of; and possibly
they might pass at a harmless distance, and not discover her or her
quarry.

The listeners were not kept long in suspense. The pack, as it chanced,
was on the trail of a moose which, labouring heavily in the deep snow,
had passed, at a distance of some thirty or forty yards, a few minutes
before the carcajou's arrival. The wolves swept into view through the
tall fir trunks--five in number, and running so close that a
table-cloth might have covered them. They knew by the trail that the
quarry must be near, and, urged on by the fierce thrust of their
hunger, they were not looking to right or left. They were almost past,
and the lynx was beginning to take heart again, when, out of the tail
of his eye, the pack-leader detected something unusual on the snow
near the foot of the big rock. One fair look explained it all to him.
With an exultant yelp he turned, and the pack swept down upon the
prisoner; while the carcajou, bursting with indignation, slipped up
the nearest tree.

The captive was not abject, but game to the last tough fibre. All
fangs and rending claws, with a screech and a bound he met the
onslaught of the pack; and, for all the hideous handicap of that thing
of iron on his leg, he gave a good account of himself. For a minute or
two the wolves and their victim formed one yelling, yelping heap. When
it disentangled itself, three of the wolves were badly torn, and one
had the whole side of his face laid open. But in a few minutes there
was nothing left of the unfortunate lynx but a few of the heavier
bones--to which the pack might return later--and the scrap of fur and
flesh that was held in the jaws of the trap.

[Illustration: "SNAPPED BACK AT HIM WITH A VICIOUS GROWL."]

As the carcajou saw her prospective meal disappearing, her rage became
almost uncontrollable, and she crept down the tree-trunk as if she
would fling herself upon the pack. The leader sprang at her, leaping
as high as he could against the trunk; and she, barely out of reach of
his clashing, bloody fangs, snapped back at him with a vicious growl,
trying to catch the tip of his nose. Failing in this, she struck at
him like lightning with her powerful claws, raking his muzzle so
severely that he fell back with a startled yelp. A moment later the
whole pack, their famine still unsatisfied, swept off again upon the
trail of the moose. The carcajou came down, sniffed angrily at the
clean bones which had been cracked for their marrow, then hurried off
on the track of the wolves.


II

Meanwhile, it had chanced that the man on snowshoes, fetching a wide
circle that would bring the end of his line of traps back nearly to
his cabin, had come suddenly face to face with the fleeing moose. Worn
out with the terror of his flight and the heart-breaking effort of
floundering through the heavy snow--which was, nevertheless, hard
enough, on the surface, to bear up his light-footed pursuers--the
great beast was near his last gasp. At sight of the man before him,
more to be dreaded even than the savage foe behind him, he snorted
wildly and plunged off to one side. But the man, borne up upon his
snowshoes, overtook him in a moment, and, suddenly stooping forward,
drew his long hunting-knife across the gasping throat. The snow about
grew crimson instantly, and the huge beast sank with a shudder.

The trapper knew that a moose so driven must have had enemies on
its trail, and he knew also that no enemies but wolves, or another
hunter, could have driven the moose to such a flight. There was no
other hunter ranging within twenty miles of him. Therefore, it was
wolves. He had no weapon with him but his knife and his light axe,
because his rifle was apt to be a useless burden in winter, when he
had always traps or pelts to carry. And it was rash for one man,
without his gun, to rob a wolf-pack of its kill! But the trapper
wanted fresh moose-meat. Hastily and skilfully he began to cut
from the carcass the choicest portions of haunch and loin. He had no
more than fairly got to work when the far-off cry of the pack
sounded on his expectant ears. He laboured furiously as the voices
drew nearer. The interruption of the lynx he understood, in a
measure, by the noises that reached him; but when the pack came
hot on the trail again he knew it was time to get away. He must
retreat promptly, but not be seen retreating. Bearing with him such
cuts as he had been able to secure, he made off in the direction of
his cabin. But at a distance of about two hundred yards he stepped
into a thicket at the base of a huge hemlock, and turned to see
what the wolves would do when they found they had been forestalled. As
he turned, the wolves appeared, and swept down upon the body of the
moose. But within a couple of paces of it they stopped short, with a
snarl of suspicion, and drew back hastily. The tracks and the
scent of their arch-enemy, man, were all about the carcass. His
handiwork--his clean cutting--was evident upon it. Their first
impulse was toward caution. Suspecting a trap, they circled warily
about the body. Then, reassured, their rage blazed up. Their own
quarry had been killed before them, their own hunting insolently
crossed. However, it was man, the ever-insolent overlord, who had
done it. He had taken toll as he would, and withdrawn when he would.
They did not quite dare to follow and seek vengeance. So in a few
moments their wrath had simmered down; and they fell savagely upon the
yet warm feast.

The trapper watched them from his hiding-place, not wishing to risk
attracting their attention before they had quite gorged themselves. He
knew there would be plenty of good meat left, even then; and that
they would at length proceed to bury it for future use. Then he could
dig it up again, take what remained clean and unmauled, and leave the
rest to its lawful owners; and all without unnecessary trouble.

As he watched the banqueting pack, he was suddenly conscious of a
movement in the branches of a fir a little beyond them. Then his quick
eye, keener in discrimination than that of any wolf, detected the
sturdy figure of a large wolverene making its way from tree to tree at
a safe distance above the snow, intent upon the wolves. What one
carcajou--"Glutton," he called it--could hope, for all its cunning, to
accomplish against five big timber-wolves, he could not imagine.
Hating the "Glutton," as all trappers do, he wished most earnestly
that it might slip on its branch and fall down before the fangs of the
pack.

There was no smallest danger of the wary carcajou doing anything of
the sort. Every faculty was on the alert to avenge herself on the
wolves who had robbed her of her destined prey. Most of the other
creatures of the wild she despised, but the wolves she also hated,
because she felt herself constrained to yield them way. She crawled
carefully from tree to tree, till at last she gained one whose lower
branches spread directly over the carcass of the moose. Creeping
out upon one of those branches, she glared down maliciously upon
her foes. Observing her, two of the wolves desisted long enough from
their feasting to leap up at her with fiercely gnashing teeth. But
finding her out of reach, and scornfully unmoved by their futile
demonstrations, they gave it up and fell again to their ravenous
feasting.

The wolverene is a big cousin to the weasel, and also to the skunk.
The ferocity of the weasel it shares, and the weasel's dauntless
courage. Its kinship to the skunk is attested by the possession of a
gland which secretes an oil of peculiarly potent malodour. The smell
of this oil is not so overpowering, so pungently strangulating, as
that emitted by the skunk; but all the wild creatures find it
irresistibly disgusting. No matter how pinched and racked by famine
they may be, not one of them will touch a morsel of meat which a
wolverene has defiled ever so slightly. The wolverene itself, however,
by no means shares this general prejudice.

When the carcajou had glared down upon the wolves for several minutes,
she ejected the contents of her oil-gland all over the body of the
moose, impartially treating her foes to a portion of the nauseating
fluid. With coughing, and sneezing, and furious yelping, the wolves
bounded away, and began rolling and burrowing in the snow. They could
not rid themselves at once of the dreadful odour; but, presently
recovering their self-possession, and resolutely ignoring the polluted
meat, they ranged themselves in a circle around the tree at a safe
distance, and snapped their long jaws vengefully at their adversary.
They seemed prepared to stay there indefinitely, in the hope of
starving out the carcajou and tearing her to pieces. Perceiving this,
the carcajou turned her back upon them, climbed farther up the tree to
a comfortable crotch, and settled herself indifferently for a nap. For
all her voracious appetite, she knew she could go hungry longer than
any wolf, and quite wear out the pack in a waiting game. Then the
trapper, indignant at seeing so much good meat spoiled, but his
sporting instincts stirred to sympathy by the triumph of one beast
like the carcajou over a whole wolf-pack, turned his back upon the
scene and resumed his tramp. The wolves had lost prestige in his
eyes, and he now felt ready to fight them all with his single axe.


III

From that day on the wolf-pack cherished a sleepless grudge against
the carcajou, and wasted precious hours, from time to time, striving
to catch her off her guard. The wolf's memory is a long one, and the
feud lost nothing in its bitterness as the winter weeks, loud with
storm or still with deadly cold, dragged by. For a time the crafty old
carcajou fed fat on the flesh which none but she could touch, while
all the other beasts but the bear, safe asleep in his den, and the
porcupine, browsing contentedly on hemlock and spruce, went lean with
famine. During this period, since she had all that even her great
appetite could dispose of, the carcajou robbed neither the hunter's
traps nor the scant stores of the other animals. But at last her
larder was bare. Then, turning her attention to the traps again, she
speedily drew upon her the trapper's wrath, and found herself obliged
to keep watch against two foes at once, and they the most powerful in
the wilderness--namely, the man and the wolf-pack. Even the magnitude
of this feud, however, did not daunt her greedy but fearless spirit,
and she continued to rob the traps, elude the wolves, and evade the
hunter's craftiest efforts, till the approach of spring not only eased
the famine of the forest but put an end to the man's trapping. When
the furs of the wild kindred began to lose their gloss and vitality,
the trapper loaded his pelts upon a big hand-sledge, sealed up his
cabin securely, and set out for the settlements before the snow should
all be gone. Once assured of his absence, the carcajou devoted all her
strength and cunning to making her way into the closed cabin. At last,
after infinite patience and endeavour, she managed to get in, through
the roof. There were supplies--flour, and bacon, and dried apples, all
very much to her distinctly catholic taste--and she enjoyed herself
immensely till private duties summoned her reluctantly away.

Spring comes late to the great snows, but when it does come it is
swift and not to be denied. Then summer, with much to do and little
time to do it in, rushes ardently down upon the plains and the
fir-forests. About three miles back from the cabin, on a dry knoll in
the heart of a tangled swamp, the old wolverene dug herself a
commodious and secret burrow. Here she gave birth to a litter of tiny
young ones, much like herself in miniature, only of a paler colour and
softer, silkier fur. In her ardent, unflagging devotion to these
little ones she undertook no hunting that would take her far from
home, but satisfied her appetite with mice, slugs, worms and beetles.

Living in such seclusion as she did, her enemies the wolves lost all
track of her for the time. The pack had broken up, as a formal
organization, according to the custom of wolf-packs in summer. But
there was still more or less cohesion, of a sort, between its
scattered members; and the leader and his mate had a cave not many
miles from the wolverene's retreat.

As luck would have it, the gray old leader, returning to the cave one
day with the body of a rabbit between his gaunt jaws, took a short cut
across the swamp, and came upon the trail of his long-lost enemy. In
fact, he came upon several of her trails; and he understood very well
what it meant. He had no time, or inclination, to stop and look into
the matter then; but his sagacious eyes gleamed with vengeful
intention as he continued his journey.

About this time--the time being a little past midsummer--the man came
back to his cabin, bringing supplies. It was a long journey between
the cabin and the settlements, and he had to make it several times
during the brief summer, in order to accumulate stores enough to last
through the long, merciless season of the great snows. When he reached
the cabin and found that, in spite of all his precautions, the greedy
carcajou had outwitted him and broken in, and pillaged his stores, his
indignation knew no bounds.

The carcajou had become an enemy more dangerous to him than all the
other beasts of the wild together. She must be hunted down and
destroyed before he could go on with his business of laying in stores
for the winter.

For several days the man prowled in ever-widening circles around his
cabin, seeking to pick up his enemy's fresh trail. At last, late one
afternoon, he found it, on the outskirts of the swamp. It was too late
to follow it up then. But the next day he set out betimes with rifle,
axe and spade, vowed to the extermination of the whole carcajou
family, for he knew, as well as the old wolf did, why the carcajou had
taken up her quarters in the swamp.

It chanced that this very morning was the morning when the wolves had
undertaken to settle their ancient grudge. The old leader--his mate
being occupied with her cubs--had managed to get hold of two other
members of the pack, with memories as long as his. The unravelling of
the trails in the swamp was an easy task for their keen noses. They
found the burrow on the dry, warm knoll, prowled stealthily all about
it for a few minutes, then set themselves to digging it open. When the
man, whose wary, moccasined feet went noiselessly as a fox's, came in
eyeshot of the knoll, the sight he caught through the dark jumble of
tree-trunks brought him to a stop. He slunk behind a screen of
branches and peered forth with eager interest. What he saw was three
big, gray wolves, starting to dig furiously. He knew they were digging
at the carcajou's burrow.

When the wolves fell to digging their noses told them that there were
young carcajous in the burrow, but they could not be sure whether the
old one was at home or not. On this point, however, they were
presently informed. As the dry earth flew from beneath their furious
claws, a dark, blunt snout shot forth, to be as swiftly withdrawn.
Its appearance was followed by a yelp of pain, and one of the younger
wolves drew back, walking on three legs. One fore paw had been bitten
clean through, and he lay down whining, to lick and cherish it. That
paw, at least, would do no more digging for some time.

The man, in his hiding-place behind the screen, saw what had happened,
and felt a twinge of sympathetic admiration for his enemy, the savage
little fighter in the burrow. The remaining two wolves now grew more
cautious, keeping back from the entrance as well as they could, and
undermining its edges. Again and again the dark muzzle shot forth, but
the wolves always sprang away in time to escape punishment. This went
on till the wolves had made such an excavation that the man thought
they must be nearing the bottom of the den. He waited breathlessly for
the dénouement, which he knew would be exciting.

He had not long to wait.

On a sudden, as if jerked from a catapult, the old carcajou sprang
clear out, snatching at the muzzle of the nearest wolf. He dodged, but
not quite far enough; and she caught him fairly in the side of the
throat, just behind the jaw. It was a deadly grip, and the wolf rose
on his hind legs, struggling frantically to shake her off. But with
her great strength and powerful, clutching claws, which she used
almost as a bear might, she pulled him down on top of her, striving to
use his bulk as a shield against the fangs of the other wolf; and the
two rolled over and over to the foot of the knoll.

It was the second young wolf, unfortunately for her, that she had
fastened upon, or the victory, even against such odds, might have been
hers. But the old leader was wary. He saw that his comrade was done
for; so he stood watchful, biding his chance to get just the grip he
wanted. At length, as he saw the younger wolf's struggles growing
feebler, he darted in and slashed the carcajou frightfully across the
loins. But this was not the hold that he wanted. As she dropped her
victim and turned upon him valiantly, he caught her high up on the
back, and held her fast between his bone-crushing jaws. It was a final
and fatal grip; but she was not beaten until she was dead. With her
fierce eyes already glazing she writhed about and succeeded in fixing
her death-grip upon the victor's lean fore leg. With the last ounce
of her strength, the last impulses of her courage and her hate, she
clinched her jaws till her teeth met through flesh, sinew and the
cracking bone itself. Then her lifeless body went limp, and with a
swing of his massive neck the old wolf flung her from him.

Having satisfied himself that she was quite dead, the old wolf now
slunk off on three legs into the swamp, holding his maimed and
bleeding limb as high as he could. Then the man stepped out from his
hiding-place and came forward. The wolf who had been first bitten got
up and limped away with surprising agility; but the one in whose
throat the old carcajou had fixed her teeth lay motionless where he
had fallen, a couple of paces from his dead slayer. Wolf-pelts were no
good at this season, so the man thrust the body carelessly aside with
his foot. But he stood for a minute or two looking down with whimsical
respect on the dead form of the carcajou.

"Y' ain't nawthin' but a thief an' stinkin' Glutton," he muttered
presently, "an' the whole kit an' bilin' of ye's got to be wiped out!
But, when it comes to grit, clean through, I takes off my cap to ye!"




WHEN THE TRUCE OF THE WILD IS DONE


BY day it was still high summer in the woods, with slumbrous heat at
noon, and the murmur of insects under the thick foliage. But to the
initiated sense there was a difference. A tang in the forest scents
told the nostrils that autumn had arrived. A crispness in the feel of
the air, elusive but persistent, hinted of approaching frost. The
still warmth was haunted, every now and then, by a passing ghost of
chill. Here and there the pale green of the birches was thinly webbed
with gold. Here and there a maple hung out amid its rich verdure a
branch prematurely turned, glowing like a banner of aërial rose. Along
the edges of the little wild meadows which bordered the loitering
brooks the first thin blooms of the asters began to show, like a veil
of blown smoke. In open patches, on the hillsides the goldenrod burned
orange and the fireweed spread its washes of violet pink. Somewhere
in the top of a tall poplar, crowning the summit of a glaring white
bluff, a locust twanged incessantly its strident string. Mysteriously,
imperceptibly, without sound and without warning, the change had
come.

Hardly longer ago than yesterday, the wild creatures had been unwary
and confident, showing themselves everywhere. The partridge coveys had
whirred up noisily in full view of the passing woodsman, and craned
their necks to watch him from the near-by branches. On every shallow
mere and tranquil river-reach the flocks of wild ducks had fed boldly,
suffering canoe or punt to come within easy gunshot. In the heavy
grass of the wild meadows, or among the long, washing sedges of the
lakeside, the red deer had pastured openly in the broad daylight, with
tramplings and splashings, and had lifted large bright eyes of
unterrified curiosity if a boat or canoe happened by. The security of
that great truce, which men called "close season" had rested sweetly
on the forest.

Then suddenly, when the sunrise was pink on the mists, a gunshot had
sent the echoes clamouring across the still lake waters, and a flock
of ducks, flapping up and fleeing with frightened cries, had left one
of its members sprawling motionless among the flattened sedge, a heap
of bright feathers spattered with blood. Later in the morning a rifle
had cracked sharply on the hillside, and a little puff of white smoke
had blown across the dark front of the fir groves. The truce had come
to an end.

All summer long men had kept the truce with strictness, and the
hunter's fierce instinct, curbed alike by law and foresight, had
slumbered. But now the young coveys were full-fledged and strong of
wing, well able to care for themselves. The young ducks were full
grown, and no longer needed their mother's guardianship and teaching.
The young deer were learning to shift for themselves, and finding, to
their wonder and indignation, that their mothers grew day by day more
indifferent to them, more inclined to wander off in search of new
interests. The time had come when the young of the wilderness stood no
longer in need of protection. Then the hand of the law was lifted.

Instantly in the hearts of men the hunter's fever flamed up, and, with
eager eyes, they went forth to kill. Where they had yesterday walked
openly, hardly heeding the wild creatures about them, they now crept
stealthily, following the trails, or lying in ambush, waiting for the
unsuspicious flock to wing past. And when they found that the game,
yesterday so abundant and unwatchful, had to-day almost wholly
disappeared, they were indignant, and wished that they had anticipated
the season by a few hours.

As a matter of fact, the time of the ending of the truce was not the
same for all the wild creatures which had profited by its protection
through the spring and summer. Certain of the tribes, according to the
law's provisions, were secure for some weeks longer yet. But this they
never seemed to realize. As far as they could observe, when the truce
was broken for one it was broken for all, and all took alarm together.
In some unexplained way, perhaps by the mere transmission of a general
fear, word went around that the time had come for invisibility and
craft. All at once, therefore, as it seemed to men, the wilderness had
become empty.

Down a green, rough wood-road, leading from the Settlement to one of
the wild meadows by the river, came a young man in homespun carrying a
long, old-fashioned, muzzle-loading duck-gun. Two days before this he
had seen a fine buck, with antlers perfect and new-shining from the
velvet, feeding on the edge of this meadow. The young woodsman had
his gun loaded with buckshot. He wanted both venison and a pair of
horns; and, knowing the fancy of the deer for certain favourite
pastures, he had great hopes of finding the buck somewhere about the
place where he had last seen him. With flexible "larrigans" of oiled
cowhide on his feet, the hunter moved noiselessly and swiftly as a
panther, his keen pale-blue eyes peering from side to side through the
shadowy undergrowth. Not three steps aside from the path, moveless as
a stone and invisible among the spotted weeds and twigs, a crafty old
cock-partridge stood with head erect and unwinking eyes and watched
the dangerous intruder stride by.

Approaching the edge of the open, the young hunter kept himself
carefully hidden behind the fringing leafage and looked forth upon the
little meadow. No creature being in sight, he cut straight across the
grass to the water's edge, and scanned the muddy margin for
foot-prints. These he presently found in abundance, along between
grass and sedge. Most of the marks were old; but others were so fresh
that he knew the buck must have been there and departed within the
last ten minutes. Into some deep hoof-prints the water was still
oozing, while from others the trodden stems of sedge were slowly
struggling upright.

A smile of keen satisfaction passed over the young woodsman's face at
these signs. He prided himself on his skill in trailing, and the
primeval predatory elation thrilled his nerves. At a swift but easy
lope he took up that clear trail, and followed it back through the
grass toward the woods. It entered the woods not ten paces from the
point where the hunter himself had emerged, ran parallel with the old
wood-road for a dozen yards, and came to a plain halt in the heart of
a dense thicket of hemlock. From the thicket it went off in great
leaps in a direction at right angles to the path. There was not a
breath of wind stirring, to carry a scent. So the hunter realized that
his intended victim had been watching him from the thicket, and that
it was now a case of craft against craft. He tightened his belt for a
long chase, and set his lean jaws doggedly as he resumed the trail.

The buck, who was wise with the wisdom of experience, and apprised by
the echoes of the first gunshot of the fact that the truce was over,
had indeed been watching the hunter very sagaciously. The moment he
was satisfied that it was his trail the hunter was following, he had
set out at top speed, anxious to get as far as possible from so
dangerous a neighbourhood. At first his fear grew with his flight, so
that his great, soft eyes stared wildly and his nostrils dilated as he
went bounding over all obstacles. Then little by little the triumphant
exercise of his powers, and a realization of how far his speed
surpassed that of his pursuer, reassured him somewhat. He decided to
rest, and find out what his foe was doing. He doubled back parallel
with his own trail for about fifty yards, then lay down in a thicket
to watch the enemy go by.

In an incredibly short time he did go by, at that long, steady swing
which ate up the distance so amazingly. As soon as he was well past,
the buck sprang up and was off again at full speed, his heart once
more thumping with terror.

This time, however, instead of running straight ahead, he made a wide,
sweeping curve, tending back toward the river and the lakes. As
before, only somewhat sooner, his alarm subsided and his confidence,
along with his curiosity, returned. He repeated his former manoeuvre
of doubling back a little way upon his trail, then again lay down to
wait for the passing of his foe.

When the hunter came to that first abrupt turn of the trail he
realized that it was a cunning and experienced buck with which he had
to deal. He smiled confidently, however, feeling sure of his own
skill, and ran at full speed to the point where the animal had lain
down to watch him pass. From this point he followed the trail just far
enough to catch its curve. Then he left it and ran in a straight line
shrewdly calculated to form the chord to his quarry's section of a
circle. His plan was to intercept and pick up the trail again about
three quarters of a mile further on. In nine cases out of ten his
calculation would have worked out as he wished; but in this case he
had not made allowance for this particular buck's individuality. While
he imagined his quarry to be yet far ahead, he ran past a leafy clump
of mingled Indian pear and thick spruce seedlings. Half a minute later
he heard a crash of underbrush behind him. As he turned he caught a
tantalizing glimpse of tawny haunches vanishing through the green, and
he knew that once again he had been outplayed.

This time the wise buck was distinctly more terrified than before. The
appearance of his enemy at this unexpected point, so speedily, and not
upon the trail, struck a panic to his heart. Plainly, this was no
common foe, to be evaded by familiar stratagems. His curiosity and his
confidence disappeared completely.

[Illustration: "RUNNING IN THE SHALLOW WATER TO COVER HIS SCENT"]

The buck set off in a straight line for the river, now perhaps a
half-mile distant. Reaching it, he turned down the shore, running in
the shallow water to cover his scent. It never occurred to him that
his enemy was trailing him by sight, not by scent; so he followed the
same tactics he would have employed had the pursuer been a wolf or a
dog. A hundred yards further on he rounded a sharp bend of the stream.
Here he took to deep water, swam swiftly to the opposite shore, and
vanished into the thick woods.

Two or three minutes later the man came out upon the river's edge. The
direction his quarry had taken was plainly visible by the splashes of
water on the rocks, and he smiled grimly at the precaution which the
animal had taken to cover his secret. But when he reached the point
where the buck had taken to deep water the smile faded. He stopped,
leaning on his gun and staring across the river, and a baffled look
came over his face. Realizing, after a few moments, that he was beaten
in this game, he drew out his charge of buckshot, reloaded his gun
with small duckshot, and hid himself in a waterside covert of young
willows, in the hope that a flock of mallard or teal might presently
come by.




THE WINDOW IN THE SHACK


THE attitude in which the plump baby hung limply over the woman's left
arm looked most uncomfortable. The baby, however, seemed highly
content. Both his sticky fists clutched firmly a generous "chunk" of
new maple-sugar, which he mumbled with his toothless gums, while his
big eyes, widening like an owl's, stared about through the dusk with a
placid intentness.

From the woman's left hand dangled an old tin lantern containing a
scrap of tallow candle, whose meagre gleam flickered hither and
thither apprehensively among the huge shadows of the darkening wood.
In her right hand the woman carried a large tin bucket, half filled
with fresh-run maple-sap. By the glimmer of the ineffectual candle,
she moved wearily from one great maple to another, emptying the
birch-bark cups that hung from the little wooden taps driven into the
trunks. The night air was raw with the chill of thawing snow, and
carried no sound but the soft tinkle of the sap as it dript swiftly
into the birchen cups. The faint, sweet smell of the sap seemed to
cling upon the darkness. The candle flared up for an instant,
revealing black, mysterious aisles among the ponderous tree-trunks,
then guttered down and almost went out, the darkness seeming to swoop
in upon its defeat. The woman examined it, found that it was all but
done, and glanced nervously over her shoulder. Then she made anxious
haste to empty and replace the last of the birchen cups before she
should be left in darkness to grope her way back to the cabin.

The sap was running freely that spring, and the promise of a great
sugar-harvest was not to be ignored. Dave Stone's house and farm lay
about three miles distant, across the valley of the "Tin Kittle," from
the maple-clad ridge of forest wherein he had his sugar-camp. The camp
consisted of a little cabin or "shack" of rough boards and an open
shed with a rude but spacious fireplace and chimney to accommodate the
great iron pot in which the sap was boiled down into sugar. While the
sap was running freely, the pot had to be kept boiling uniformly and
the thickening sap kept skimmed clean of the creaming scum; and
therefore, during the season, some one had to be always living in the
camp.

Dave Stone had built his camp at an opening in the woods, in such a
position that, from its own little window in the rear, he could look
out across the wide valley of the "Tin Kittle" to a rigid grove of
firs behind which, shielded from the nor'easters, lay his low frame
house, and red-doored barn, and wide, liberal sheds. The distance was
only about three miles, or less, from the house to the sugar-camp. But
Dave Stone was terribly proud of the prosperous little homestead which
he had carved for himself out of the unbroken wilderness on the upper
"Tin Kittle," and more than proud of the slim, gray-eyed wife and
three sturdy youngsters to whom that homestead gave happy shelter. On
the spring nights when he had to stay over at the camp, he liked to be
able to see the grove that hid his home.

It chanced one afternoon, just in the height of the sap-running, that
Dave Stone was called suddenly in to the settlement on a piece of
business that could not wait overnight. A note which he had endorsed
for a friend had been allowed to go to protest, and Dave was excited.

"Ther' ain't nothin' fer it, Mandy," said he, "but fer ye to take the
baby an' go right over to the camp fer the night, an' keep an eye on
this bilin'."

"But, father," protested his wife, in a doubtful voice, "how kin I
leave Lidy an' Joe here alone?"

"Oh, there ain't nothin' goin' to bother _them_, an' Lidy 'most ten
year old!" insisted Dave, who was in a hurry. "Don't fret, mother.
I'll be back long afore mornin'!"

As the children had no objection to being left, Mrs. Stone suffered
herself to be persuaded. In fact, she went to her new duty with a
certain zest, as a break in the monotony of her days. She had lent a
hand often enough at the sugar-making to be familiar with the task
awaiting her, and it was with an unwonted gaiety that she set out on
what appeared to her almost in the light of a little adventure.

But it was later than she had intended when she actually got away, the
baby crowing joyously on her arm, and the children calling gay
good-byes to her from the open door. Jake, the big brown retriever,
tried to follow her; and when she ordered him back to stay with the
children, he obeyed with a whimpering reluctance that came near
rebellion. As she descended the valley, her feet sinking in the snow
of the thawing trail, she wondered why the dog, which had always
preferred the children, should have grown so anxious to be with her.

When she reached the camp, she was already tired, but the pleasant
excitement was still upon her. When she had skimmed the big,
slow-bubbling pot of syrup, tested a ladleful of it in the snow,
poured in some fresh sap, and replenished the sluggish fire, dusk was
already stealing upon the forest. In her haste she did not notice that
the candle in the old lantern was almost burned out. Snatching up the
lantern, which it was not yet necessary to light, and the big tin
sap-bucket, and giving the baby, who had begun to fret, a lump of hard
sugar to keep him quiet on her arm, she hurried off to tend the
farthest trees before the darkness should close down upon the
silences.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the last birch cup had been emptied into the bucket, the candle
flickered out; and for a moment or two the sudden blackness seemed to
flap in her face, daunting her. She stood perfectly still till her
eyes readjusted themselves. She was dead tired, the baby and the
brimming bucket were heavy, and the adventurous flavour had quite gone
out of her task.

In part because of her fatigue, she grew suddenly timorous. Her ears
began to listen with terrible intentness till they imagined stealthy
footsteps in the silken shrinkings of the damp snow. At last her eyes
mastered the gloom till she could make out the glimmering pathway, the
dim, black trunks shouldering up on either side of it, the clumps of
bushes obstructing it here and there. Trembling--clutching tightly at
the baby, the lantern, and the sap-bucket--she started back with
furtive but hurried footsteps, afraid to make any noise lest she
attract the notice of some mysterious powers of the wilderness.

As the woman went, her fears grew with her haste till only the
difficulties of the path, with the weight of her burdens, prevented
her from breaking into a run of panic. The baby, meanwhile, kept on
sucking his maple-sugar and staring into the novel darkness. The
woman's breath began to come too fast, her knees began to feel as if
they might turn to water at any moment. At last, when within perhaps
fifty paces of the shack, to her infinite relief she saw a dark, tall
figure take shape just over the top of a bush, at the turn of the
trail. She had room for but one thought. It was Dave, back earlier
than he had expected. She did not stop to wonder how or why. With a
little, breathless cry, she exclaimed: "Oh, Dave, I'm so glad! Take
the baby!" and reached forward to place the little one in his arms.

Even as she did so, however, something in the tall, dim shape rising
over the bush struck her as unfamiliar. And why didn't Dave speak? She
paused, she half drew back, while a chill fear made her cheeks
prickle; and as she slightly changed her position, the dark form grew
more definite. She saw the massive bulk of the shoulders. She caught a
glint of white teeth, of fierce, wild eyes.

With a screech of intolerable horror, she shrank back, clutching the
baby to her bosom, swung the brimming bucket of sap full into the
monster's face, and fled with the speed of a deer down another trail
toward the shack. She was at the door before her appalled brain
realized that the being to which she had tried to hand over the child
was a huge bear.

Bewildered and abashed for a few seconds by the deluge of liquid and
the clatter of the tin vessel in his face, the animal had not
instantly pursued. But he was just out of the den after his long
winter sleep and savage with hunger. Moreover, he had been allowed to
realize that the dreaded man-creature which he had met so unexpectedly
was afraid of him! He came crashing over the bushes, and was so close
at the woman's heels that she had barely time to slam the shack door
in his face.

As she dropped the rude wooden latch into place, the woman realized
with horror how frail the door was. Momentarily she expected to see it
smashed in by a stroke of the monster's paw. She did not know a bear's
caution, his cunning suspicion of traps, his dread of the scent of
man.

There was no light in the shack, except a faint red gleam from the
open draft of the stove, and the gray pallor of the night sky
glimmering in through the little window. The woman was so faint with
fear that she dared not search for the candles, but leaned panting
against the wall and staring at the window as if she expected the bear
to look in at her. She was brought to her senses in a moment, however,
by the baby beginning to cry. In the race for the shack, he had lost
his lump of sugar, and now he realized how uncomfortable he was. The
woman seated herself on the bench by the stove and began to nurse him,
all the time keeping her eyes on the pale square of the window.

[Illustration: "SNIFFED LOUDLY ALONG THE CRACK OF THE DOOR."]

When the door was slammed in his face, the bear had backed away in
apprehension and paused to study the shack. But at the sound of the
baby's voice he seemed to realize that here, at least, were some
individuals of the dreaded man tribe who were not dangerous. He came
forward and sniffed loudly along the crack of the door till the
woman's heart stood still. He leaned against it, tentatively, till it
creaked, but the latch and hinges held. Then he prowled around the
shack, examining it carefully, and doubtless expecting to find an open
entrance somewhere. In his experience, all caves and dens had
entrances. At last the window caught his attention. The woman heard
the scratching of his claws on the rough outer boarding as he raised
himself. Then the window was darkened by a great black head looking
in.

Throwing the baby into the bunk, the woman snatched from the stove a
blazing stick, rushed to the window with it, and made a wild thrust at
the dreadful face. With a crash the glass flew to splinters, and the
black face disappeared. The bear was untouched, but the fiery weapon
had taught him discretion. He drew back with an angry growl, and sat
down on his haunches as if to see what the woman would do next. She,
for her part, after this victory, grew terribly afraid of setting the
dry shack on fire; so she hurriedly returned the snapping, sparkling
brand to the stove. Thereupon the bear resumed his ominous prowling,
round and round the shack, sometimes testing the foundations and the
door with massive but stealthy paw, sometimes sniffing loudly at the
cracks; and the woman returned to the comforting of the baby.

In time the little one, fed full and cherished, went to sleep. Then,
with nothing left to occupy her mind but the terrors of her situation,
the woman found those stealthy scratchings and sniffings, and the
strain of the silences that fell between, were more than she could
endure. At first, she thought of getting a couple of blazing sticks,
throwing open the shack door, and deliberately attacking her besieger.
But this idea she dismissed as quite too desperate and futile. Then
she remembered that bears were fond of sweets. A table in the corner
was heaped with great, round cakes of fragrant sugar, the shape of the
pans in which they had been cooled. One of these she snatched up, and
threw it out of the window. The bear promptly came around to see what
had dropped, and fell upon the offering with such ardour that it
vanished between his great jaws in half a minute. Then he came
straight to the window for more, and the woman served it out to him
without delay.

[Illustration: "MADE A WILD THRUST AT THE DREADFUL FACE."]

The beast's appetite for maple-sugar was amazing, and as the woman saw
the sweet store swiftly disappearing, her fear began to be tempered
with indignation. But when her outraged frugality led her to delay the
dole, her tormentor came at the window so savagely that she made all
haste to supply him, and fell to wondering helplessly what she should
do when the sugar was all gone.

As she stood at the window, watching fearfully the vague, monstrous
shape of the animal as he pawed and gnawed at the last cake, suddenly,
far across the shadowy valley, a red light leaped into the sky. For a
moment the woman stared at it with an absent mind, absorbed in her
own trouble, yet noticing how black and sharp, like giant spears
upthrust in array, the tops of the firs stood out against the glow.
For a moment she stood so staring. Then she realized where that wild
light came from. With a cry she turned, rushed to the door, and tore
it open. But as the dark of the forest confronted her, she remembered!
Slamming and latching the door again, she rushed madly back to the
window, and stood there clutching the frame with both hands, praying,
and sobbing, and raving.

And the bear, having finished the sugar, sat up on his haunches to
gaze intently, ears cocked and jaws half open, at that far-off, fiery
brightness in the sky of night.

As the keen tongues of flame shot over the treetops, the woman
clutched at her senses, and tried to persuade herself that it was the
barn, not the house, that was burning. It was, in truth, quite
impossible to discern, at that distance, which it was. It was not
both; of that she was certain. She also told herself that, if it _was_
the house, it was too early for the children to be asleep; and even if
they _were_ asleep, Jake would wake them; and presently some
neighbours, who were not more than a mile away, would come to comfort
their fears and shelter them. She would not allow herself to harbour
the awful thought that the fire might have caught the children in
their sleep. Nevertheless, do what she could to fight it away, the
hideous suggestion kept clamouring at her brain, driving her to a
frenzy. Had she been alone in this crisis, the great beast watching
and prowling outside the shack would have had no terrors for her. But
the baby! She could not run fast with that burden. She could not leave
him behind in the bunk, for the bear would either climb in the window
or batter in the door when she was gone. Yet to stand idle and watch
those leaping flames--that way lay madness. Again her mind reverted to
the blazing brand with which she had driven the bear from the window.
If she took one big enough and carried it with her, the bear would
probably not dare even to follow her. She sprang eagerly to the stove,
but the fire was already dying down. It was nothing but a heap of
coals, and in her stress she had not noticed how cold it had grown in
the shack. She looked for wood, but there was none. She had forgotten
to bring in an armful from the pile over by the sugar-boiler. Well,
the plan had been an insane one, hopeless from the first. But, at
least, it had been a plan. The failure of it seemed to leave her
tortured brain a blank. But the cold--that was an impression that
pierced her despair. She went to the bunk, and covered the sleeping
baby with warm blankets. As she leaned over him, she heard the bear
again, sniffing, sniffing along the crack at the bottom of the door.
She almost laughed--that the beast should want anything more after all
that sugar! Then she felt herself sinking, and clutched at the edge of
the bunk to save herself. She would lie down by the baby! But instead
of that she sank upon the floor in a huddled heap.

Her swoon must have passed imperceptibly into the heavy sleep of
emotional exhaustion, for she lay unstirring for some hours. The
crying of the little one awoke her.

Stiff, half frozen, utterly dazed, she pulled herself up to the
bunk, nursed the child, and soothed him again to sleep. Then the
accumulation of anguish which had overwhelmed her rolled back upon her
understanding. She staggered to the window.

The dreadful illumination across the valley had died down to a faint
ruddiness, just seen through the thin tops of the firs. The
fire--whether it had been the barn or the house--had burned itself
out. Whatever had happened, it was over. As she stood shuddering,
unable to think, not daring to think, her eyes rested upon the bear,
huge and formless in the gloom, staring at her, not ten feet away. She
answered the stare fixedly, no longer aware of fearing him. Then she
saw him turn his head suddenly, as if he had heard something. And the
next moment he had faded away swiftly and noiselessly into the
darkness, like a startled partridge. She heard quick footsteps coming
up the trail. A dog's fierce growl broke into a bark of warning. That
was Jake's bark! She almost threw herself at the door, and tore it
open.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Dave Stone had got back from the settlement earlier than he expected,
driving furiously the last two miles of his journey, with his eyes
full of the red light of that burning, his heart gripped with
intolerable fear. He had found his good barn in flames, but the
children safe, the house untouched, the stock rescued. The children,
prompt and resourceful as the children of the backwoods have need to
be, had loosed the cattle from the stanchions and got them out in
time. Neighbours, hurrying up in response to the flaming summons, had
found the children watching the blaze enthusiastically from the
doorstep, as if it had been arranged for their amusement. Seeing
matters so much better than they might have been, Dave was struck with
a new apprehension, because Mandy had not returned. It was hardly
conceivable that she had failed to see the flames from the window of
the shack! Then why had she not come? Followed by Jake, he had taken
the camp trail at a run to find out what was the matter.

As he drew near the shack, the darkness of it chilled him with dread.
No firelight gleam showed out from the window! And no red glow came
from the boiling-shed! The fire had been allowed to die out under the
sugar-pot! As the significance of this dawned upon him, his keen
woodsman's eyes seemed to detect through the dark a shape of thicker
blackness gliding past the shack and into the woods. At the same
moment Jake growled, barked shortly, and dashed past him, with the
hair bristling along his neck.

The man's blood went to ice, as he sprang to the door of the shack,
crying in a terrible voice: "Mandy! Mandy! Where are--" But before
the question was out of his mouth, the door leaped open, and Mandy was
on his neck, shaking and sobbing.

"The children?" she gasped.

"Why, _they're_ all right, mother!" replied the man cheerfully. "It
was only the barn--an' they got the critters out all safe! But what's
wrong here? An' what's kep' you? An' didn't you--"

But he was not allowed to finish his questionings, for the woman was
crying and laughing and strangling him with her wild clasp. "Oh,
Dave!" she managed to exclaim. "It was the bear--as tried to git
us--all night long! An' he's et up every crum of the last bilin'."




THE RETURN OF THE MOOSE


"TO the best of my knowledge, ther' ain't been no moose seen this side
the river these eighteen year back."

The speaker, a heavy-shouldered, long-legged backwoodsman, paused in
his task of digging potatoes, leaned on the handle of his broad-tined
digging fork, and bit off a liberal chew from his plug of black
tobacco. His companion, digging parallel with him on the next row,
paused sympathetically, felt in his trousers' pocket for his own plug
of "black jack," and cast a contemplative eye up the wide brown slope
of the potato-field toward the ragged and desolate line of burnt woods
which crested the hill.

The woods, a long array of erect, black, fire-scarred rampikes,
appeared to scrawl the very significance of solitude against the
lonely afternoon sky. The austerity of the scene was merely heightened
by the yellow glow of a birch thicket at the further upper corner of
the potato-field, and by the faint tints of violet light that flowed
over the brown soil from a pallid and fading sunset. As the sky was
scrawled by the gray-and-black rampikes, so the slope was scrawled by
zigzag lines of gray-and-black snake fence, leading down to three log
cabins, with their cluster of log barns and sheds, scattered
irregularly along a terrace of the slope. A quarter of a mile further
down, beyond the little gray dwellings, a sluggish river wound between
alder swamps and rough wild meadows.

As the second potato-digger was lifting his plug of tobacco to his
mouth, his hand stopped half way, and his grizzled jaw dropped in
astonishment. For a couple of seconds he stared at the ragged
hill-crest. Then, it being contrary to his code to show surprise, he
bit off his chew, returned the tobacco to his pocket, and coolly
remarked: "Well, I reckon they've come back."

"What do you mean?" demanded the first speaker, who had resumed his
digging.

"There be your moose, after these eighteen year!" said the other.

Standing out clear of the dead forest, and staring curiously down upon
the two potato-diggers, were three moose,--a magnificent, black,
wide-antlered bull, an ungainly brown cow, and a long-legged,
long-eared calf. A potato-field, with men digging in it, was something
far apart from their experience and manifestly filled them with
interest.

"Keep still now, Sandy," muttered the first speaker, who was wise in
the ways of the wood-folk. "Keep still till they git used to us. Then
we'll go for our guns."

The men stood motionless for a couple of minutes, and the moose came
further into the open in order to get a better look at them. Then,
leaving their potato forks standing in their furrows, the men strode
quietly down the field, down the rocky pasture lane, and into the
nearest house. Here the man called Sandy got down his gun,--an old
muzzle-loading, single-barrelled musket,--and hurriedly loaded it with
buckshot; while the other, who was somewhat the more experienced
hunter, ran on to the next cabin and got his big Snider rifle. The
moose, meanwhile, having watched the men fairly indoors, turned aside
and fell to browsing on the tiny poplar saplings which grew along the
top of the field.

[Illustration: "A MAGNIFICENT, BLACK, WIDE-ANTLERED BULL, AN UNGAINLY
BROWN COW, AND A LONG-LEGGED, LONG-EARED CALF."]

Saying nothing to their people in the houses, after the reticent
backwoods fashion, Sandy and Lije strolled carelessly down the road
till the potato-field was hidden from sight by a stretch of young
second-growth spruce and fir. Up through this cover they ran eagerly,
bending low, and gained the forest of rampikes on top of the hill.
Here they circled widely, crouching in the coarse weeds and dodging
from trunk to trunk, until they knew they were directly behind the
potato-field. Then they crept noiselessly outward toward the spot
where they had last seen the moose. The wind was blowing softly into
their faces, covering their scent; and their dull gray homespun
clothes fitted the colour of the desolation around them.

Now it chanced that the big bull had changed his mind, and wandered
back among the rampikes, leaving the cow and calf at their browsing
among the poplars. The woodsmen, therefore, came upon him unexpectedly.
Not thirty yards distant, he stood eying them with disdainful
curiosity, his splendid antlers laid back while he thrust forward his
big, sensitive nose, trying to get the wind of these mysterious
strangers. There was menace in his small, watchful eyes, and
altogether his appearance was so formidable that the hunters were
just a trifle flurried, and fired too hastily. The big bullet of
Lije's Snider went wide, while a couple of Sandy's buckshot did no
more than furrow the great beast's shoulder. The sudden pain and the
sudden monstrous noise filled him with rage, and, with an ugly
grunting roar, he charged.

"Up a tree, Sandy!" yelled Lije, setting the example. But the bull was
so close at his heels that he could not carry his rifle with him. He
dropped it at the foot of the tree, and swung himself up into the dead
branches just in time to escape the animal's rearing plunge.

Sandy, meanwhile, had found himself in serious plight, there being no
suitable refuge just at hand. Those trees which were big enough had
had no branches spared by the fire. He had to run some distance. Just
as he was hesitating as to what he should do, and looking for a rock
or stump behind which he might hide while he reloaded his gun, the
moose caught sight of him, forgot about Lije, and came charging
through the weeds. Sandy had no more time for hesitation. He dropped
his unwieldy musket, and clambered into a blackened and branchy
hackmatack, so small that he feared the rush of the bull might break
it down. It did, indeed, crack ominously when the headlong bulk
reared upon it; but it stood. And Sandy felt as if every branch he
grasped were an eggshell.

Seeing that the bull's attention was so well occupied, Lije slipped
down the further side of his tree and recaptured his Snider. He had by
this time entirely recovered his nerve, and now felt master of the
situation. Having slipped in a new cartridge he stood forth boldly and
waited for the moose to offer him a fair target. As the animal moved
this way and that, he at length presented his flank. The big Snider
roared; and he dropped with a ball through his heart, dead instantly.
Sandy came down from his little tree, and touched the huge dark form
and mighty antlers with admiring awe.

In the meantime, the noise of the firing had thrown the cow and calf
into a panic. Since the woods behind them were suddenly filled with
such thunders, they could not flee in that direction. But far below
them, down the brown slopes and past the gray cabins, they saw the
river gleaming among its alder thickets. There was the shelter they
craved; and down the fields they ran, with long, shambling, awkward
strides that took them over the ground at a tremendous pace. At the
foot of the field they blundered into the lane leading down to
Sandy's cabin.

Now, as luck would have it, Sandy had that summer decided to build
himself a frame house to supplant the old log cabin. As a preliminary,
he had dug a spacious cellar, just at the foot of the lane. It was
deep as well as wide, being intended for the storage of many potatoes.
And, in order to prevent any of the cattle from falling into it, he
had surrounded it with a low fence which chanced to be screened along
the upper side with a rank growth of burdock and other barnyard
weeds.

When the moose cow reached this fence, she hardly noticed it. She was
used to striding over obstacles. Just now her heart was mad with
panic, and her eyes full of the gleam of the river she was seeking.
She cleared the fence without an effort--and went crashing to the
bottom of the cellar. Not three paces behind her came the calf.

By this time, of course, all the little settlement was out, and the
flight of the cow and calf down the field had been followed with eager
eyes. Everyone ran at once to the cellar. The unfortunate cow was seen
to have injured herself so terribly by the plunge that, without
waiting for the owner of the cellar to return, the young farmer from
the third cabin jumped down and ended her suffering with a butcher
knife. The calf, however, was unhurt. He stood staring stupidly at his
dead mother and showed no fear of the people that came up to stroke
and admire him. He seemed so absolutely docile that when Sandy and
Lije came proudly down the hill to tell of their achievement, Sandy
declared that the youngster should be kept and made a pet of.

"Seems to me," he said to Lije, "that seein' as the moose had been so
long away, we hain't treated them jest right when they come back. I
feel like we'd ought to make it up to the little feller."




FROM THE TEETH OF THE TIDE


HITHERTO, ever since he had been old enough to leave the den, the
mother bear had been leading her fat black cub inland, among the
tumbled rocks and tangled spruce and pine, teaching him to dig for
tender roots and nose out grubs and beetles from the rotting stumps.
To-day, feeling the need of saltier fare, she led him in the opposite
direction, down through a cleft in the cliffs, and out across the
great, red, glistening mud-flats left bare by the ebb of the terrific
Fundy tides.

From the secure warmth of his den the cub had heard, faint and far
off, the waves thundering along the bases of the cliffs, when the tide
was high and the great winds drew heavily in from sea. The sound had
always made him afraid; and to-day, though there was no wind, and the
tide was so far out that it made no noise but a soft whisper, silken
and persuasive, he held back with babyish timidity, till his mother
brought him to his senses with an unceremonious cuff on the side of
the head. With a squall of grieved surprise he picked himself up,
shaking his head as if he had a bee in his ear, and then made haste to
follow obediently, close at his mother's huge black heels.

From the break in the cliffs, where the bears came down, ran a ledge
of shelving rocks on a long, gradual slant across the flats toward the
edge of low water. The tide was nearing the last of the ebb; and now,
the slope of the shore being very gradual, and the difference between
high and low water in these turbulent channels something between forty
and fifty feet, the lapsing fringes of the ebb, yellow-tawny with
silt, were a good three-quarters of a mile away from the foot of the
cliffs. The vast spaces between were smooth, oily, copper-red mud,
shining and treacherous in the sun with the narrow black outcrop of
the ledge drawn across on so gentle a slant that before it reached the
water it was running almost on a parallel with the shoreline.

Along the rocky ledge the old bear led the way, pausing to nose at a
patch of seaweed here and there or to glance shrewdly into the shallow
pools among the rocks. The cub obediently followed her example,
though doubtless with no idea of what he might hope to find. But the
upper stretches of the ledge, near high-water mark, offered nothing to
reward their quest, having been dry for several hours, and long ago
thoroughly gone over by earlier foragers. So the bears pushed on down
toward the lower stretches, where the ledges were still wet, and the
long, black-green weed-masses still dripping, and where the
limpet-covered protuberances of rock still oozed and sparkled. With
her iron-hard claws the mother bear scraped off a quantity of these
limpets, and crushed them between her jaws with relish, swallowing the
salty juices. The cub tried clumsily to imitate her, but the limpets
defied his too tender claws, so he ran to his mother, thrust her great
head aside, and greedily licked up a share of her scrapings. The sea
flavour tickled his palate, but the rough, hard shells exasperated
him. They hurt his gums, so that he merely rolled them over in his
mouth, sucked at them a few moments, then spat them out indignantly.
His mother thereupon forsook the unsatisfactory limpets, and went
prowling on toward the water's edge in search of more satisfying
fare. As they left the limpets, a gaunt figure in gray homespuns,
carrying a rifle, appeared on the crest of the cliffs above, caught
sight of them, and hurriedly took cover behind an overhanging pine.

The young woodsman's first impulse was to try a long shot at the
hulking black shape so conspicuous out on the ledge, against the
bright water. He wanted a bearskin, even if the fur was not just then
in prime condition. But more particularly he wanted the cub, to tame
and play with if it should prove amenable, and to sell, ultimately,
for a good amount, to some travelling show. On consideration, he
decided to lie in wait among the rocks till the rising tide should
drive the bears back to the upland. He exchanged his steel-nosed
cartridges for the more deadly mushroom-tipped, filled his pipe, and
lay back comfortably against the pine trunk, to watch, through the
thin green frondage, the foraging of his intended prey.

The farther they went down the long slant of the ledge, the more
interested the bears became. Here the crows and gulls had not had time
to capture all the prizes. There were savoury blue-shelled mussels
clinging under the tips of the rocks; plump, spiral whelks between
the oozy tresses of the seaweed; orange starfish and bristly
sea-urchins in the shallow pools. All these dainties had shells that
the cub's young teeth could easily crush, and they yielded meaty
morsels that made beetles and grubs seem very meagre fare. Moreover,
in the salty bitter of this sea-fruit there was something marvelously
stimulating to the appetite. From pool to pool the old bear wandered
on, lured ever by richer prizes just ahead; and the cub, stuffed till
his little stomach was like a black furry ball, no longer frisked and
tumbled, but waddled along beside her with eyes of shining expectancy.
As long as he was not too full to walk, he was not too full to eat
such delicacies as these. The fascinating quest led them on and on
till at last they found themselves at the water's edge.

By this time they had travelled a long way from the cleft in the
cliffs by which they had come down from the uplands. A good half-mile
of shining mud separated them, in a direct line, from the cliff base.
And the woodsman on the height, as he watched them, muttered to
himself: "Ef that old b'ar don't look out, the tide's a-goin' to ketch
her afore she knows what she's about! Most wish I'd 'a' socked it to
her afore she'd got so fur out--Jiminy! She's seed her mistake now!
The tide's turned."

While bear and cub had their noses and paws busy in a little dry pool,
on a sudden a long, shallow, muddy-crested wave had come hissing up
over their feet and filled the pool to the brim with its yellow flood.
Lifting her head sharply, the old bear glanced at the far-off cliffs,
and at the mounting tide. Instantly realizing the peril, she started
back at a slow, lumbering amble up the long, long path by which they
had come; and the cub started too at a brave gallop--not behind her,
for he was too much afraid of the hissing yellow wave, but close at
her side, between her sheltering form and the shore. He felt that she
could in some way ward off or subdue the cold and terrifying monster.

For perhaps two minutes the cub struggled on gamely, although, owing
to the fact that at this point their path was almost parallel with the
water, the fugitives made no perceptible gain, and the rising wave was
on their heels every instant. Then the greedy feeding produced its
effect. The little fellow's wind gave out completely. With a whimper
of pain and fright he dropped back upon his haunches and waited for
his mother to save him.

The old bear turned, bounced back, and cuffed him so bruskly that he
found breath enough to utter a loud squall and go stumbling forward
for another score of yards. Then he gave out, and sank upon his
too-distended stomach, whimpering piteously.

This time the mother seemed to perceive that his case was serious, and
her anxious wrath subsided. She licked him assiduously for a few
seconds, whining encouragement, till at last he got upon his feet
again, trembling. The yellow flood was now lapping on the ledge all
about them. But a rod or two farther on the rocks bulged up a couple
of feet above the surrounding slope. Thrusting the exhausted youngster
ahead of her with nose and paws, the old bear gained this point of
temporary vantage; and then, worried and frightened, sat down upon her
haunches and stared all around her, as if trying to decide what should
be done. The cub lay flat, with legs outstretched and mouth wide open,
panting.

The tide, meanwhile, was mounting so swiftly that in a few moments the
rise of rocks had become almost an island. The ledge was covered
before them as well as behind, and the only way still open lay
straight over the glistening mud. The old bear looked at it, and
whined, knowing its treacheries. And the woodsman, watching with eager
interest from the cliffs, muttered:

"Take to it, ye old bug-eater! Ther' ain't nawthin' else left fer ye
to do'!"

This was apparently the conclusion of the old bear herself; for now,
after licking and nuzzling the cub for a few seconds till he stood up,
she stepped boldly off the rock and started out over the coppery
flats. The cub, having apparently recovered his wind, followed
briskly--probably much heartened by the fact that his progress was in
a direction away from the alarming waves.

There was desperate need of haste, for when they left the rocky lift
the tide was already slipping around upon the flats beyond it.
Nevertheless, the old bear moved with deliberation. She could not
hurry the cub; and she had to choose her path. By some instinct, or
else by some peculiar keenness of observation, she seemed to detect
the "honey-pots," or deep pockets of slime, that lay concealed beneath
the uniformly shining surface of the mud; for here she would make an
aimless detour, losing many precious seconds, and there she would
side-step suddenly, for several paces, and shift her course to a new
parallel. Outside the "honey-pots," the mud was soft and tenacious to
a depth varying from a few inches to a couple of feet, but with a hard
clay foundation beneath the slime. Through this clinging red ooze the
old bear, with her huge strength, made her way without difficulty; but
the cub, in a few moments, began to find himself terribly hampered.
His fur collected the mud. His little paws sank easily, but at each
step it grew harder to withdraw them. At last, chancing to stagger
aside from his mother's spacious tracks, he sank to his belly in the
rim of a "honey-pot."

Panic-stricken, he floundered vainly, his nose high in the air and his
eyes shut tight, while his mother, unconscious of what had happened,
ploughed doggedly onward. Presently he opened his eyes. His mother was
now perhaps ten or a dozen feet ahead, apparently deserting him. Right
behind, lapping up to his very tail, was the crawling wave. A
heart-broken bawl burst from his throat.

At that cry the old bear came dashing back, red mud half-way up her
flanks and plastered all over her shaggy chest. Taking in the
situation at a glance, she seized the cub by the nape of the neck with
her teeth, and tried to drag him free. But he squealed so lamentably
that she realized that the hide would yield before the mud would. The
attempt had taken time, however; and the tide was now well up in the
fur of his back. Thrusting her paw down beneath his haunches, she tore
him clear with a mighty wrench and a loud sucking of the baffled mud.
That stroke sent him head over heels some ten feet nearer safety. By
the time he had picked himself up, pawing fretfully at the mud that
bedaubed his face and half blinded him, his mother was close behind
him, nosing him along and lifting him forward skilfully with her fore
paws.

The slope of the flats was now so gradual as to be almost imperceptible;
and the tide, therefore, seemed to be racing in with fiercer haste, as
if in wrath at being so long balked of its prey. Engrossed in her
efforts to push the cub forward, the mother now lost some of her fine
discrimination in regard to "honey-pots." She pushed the cub straight
into one; but jerked him back unceremoniously before the mud had time
to get any grip upon him. Pausing for a moment to scrutinize the
oozy expanse, she thrust the little animal furiously along to the left,
searching for a safe passage. Before she could find one, however, the
tide was upon them, their feet splashing in the thin yellow wavelets.

A broken soap-box, tossed overboard from some ship, came washing up,
and stranded just before them. With a whimper of delight, as if he
thought the box a safe refuge, the cub scrambled upon it; but his
mother ruthlessly tumbled him off and hustled him onward, floundering
and splashing.

"Ye'll hev to swim fer it, Old Woman!" growled the now excited watcher
behind the pine-tree on the cliff.

As the creeping flood by this time overspread the ooze for a couple of
yards ahead of them, the mother could no longer discriminate as to
what lay beneath it. She could do nothing now but dash ahead blindly.
Catching up the cub between her jaws, in a grip that made him squeal,
she launched herself straight toward shore, hardly daring to let her
feet rest an instant where they touched. Fortune favoured her in this
rush. She got ahead of the tide. She gained upon it, perhaps twice her
body's length. Then she paused, to drop the cub. But the pause was
fatal. She began to sink instantly. She had come upon a "honey-pot" of
stiffer consistency than the rest, which had sustained her while she
was in swift motion, but now, in return for that support, clutched her
in a grip the more inexorable. With all her huge strength she strained
to wrench herself clear. But in vain. She had no purchase. There was
nothing to put forth her strength upon. In her terror and despair she
squealed aloud, with her snout high in air as if appealing to the
blank, blue, empty sky. The cub, terror-stricken, strove to clamber
upon her back.

That harsh cry of hers, however, was but the outburst of one moment's
weakness. The next moment the indomitable old bear was striving
silently and systematically to release herself. She would wrench one
great fore arm clear, lift it high, and feel about for a solid
foundation beneath the ooze. Failing in this, she would yield that paw
to the enemy again, tear the other loose, and feel about for a
foothold in another direction. At the same time she drew out her body
to its full length, and lay flat, so that she might gain as much
support as possible by distributing her weight. Because of this
sagacity, and because the mire at this point had more substance than
in most of the other "honey-pots," she made a good fight, and almost,
but not quite, held her own. By the time the tide had once more
overtaken her she had sunk but a little way, and was still far from
giving up the unequal struggle.

Yet for all the great beast's strength, and valour, and devotion,
there could have been but one end to that brave battle, and mother and
cub would have disappeared, in a few minutes more, under the stealthy,
whispering onrush of the flood, had not the whimsical Providence--or
Hazard--of the Wild come curiously to their aid. Among the jetsam of
those restless Fundy tides almost anything that will float may appear,
from a matchbox to a barn. What appeared just now was a big spruce
log, escaped from the boom on some river emptying into the bay. It
came softly wallowing in, lipped by the little waves, and passed close
by the nose of the old bear, where she struggled with the water up to
her shoulders.

[Illustration: "PULLED THE BUTT UNDER HER CHEST."]

Quick as thought she flashed up a heavy paw, caught the log by one
end, and pulled the butt under her chest. The purchase thus gained
enabled her to free the other paw--and in a few seconds more the
weight of the fore part of her body was on the end of the log, forcing
it down to the mud. Greedy as that mud was, it was yet incapable of
engulfing a full-grown spruce timber quickly enough to defeat the
bear's purpose. Stretching far forward on the submerged log, she
strained her muscles to their utmost, and slowly drew her hind
quarters free from the deadly grip that held them. Then, seizing in
her jaws the cub, which was swimming and whimpering beside her, she
carefully felt her way farther along the log, and sat down upon it to
rest, clutching the youngster closely in one great fore arm.

Not till the tide had risen nearly to her neck did the mother move
again. She was recovering her strength. Utterly daunted by the peril
of the "honey-pots," she chose rather to trust the tide itself. At
last, catching the cub again by the back of the neck, she swam for the
shore. The tide was now within a couple of hundred yards from the
bases of the cliffs, and lapping upon solid, sun-baked clay. The
strong flood helping her, she swam fast, though laboriously by reason
of the burden in her teeth. Soon her hinder feet struck ground--but
she was afraid to trust it, and nervously drew them up beneath her. A
few moments more and she felt undeniably firm footing; whereupon she
plunged forward with a rush, and never paused, even to drop the
squirming cub, till she was above high-water mark.

When, at last, she set the little beast down, she was in such a hurry
to get away from the shore and back into the secure green woods that
she would not trust him to follow her, as usual, but drove him on
ahead, as fast as he could move, toward the cleft in the cliffs. As
they turned up the rugged trail her haste relaxed, and she went more
slowly, but still driving the cub ahead of her, that she might be
quite sure that the "honey-pots" would not reach up and clutch at him
again.

As the muddy, weary, bedraggled, pathetic-looking pair passed within
tempting range of the pine-tree on the cliff-top, the woodsman
instinctively threw forward his rifle. But the next moment he dropped
it, with a slight flush, and gave a quick glance around him as if he
feared that unseen eyes might have taken note of the gesture.

"Hell!" he muttered, "I'd 'a' been no better'n a _murderer_, 'f I'd
'a' gone an' plugged the Old Girl _now_!"




THE FIGHT AT THE WALLOW


I

FAR to the northeast of Ringwaak Hill, just beyond that deep,
far-rimmed lake which begets the torrent of the Ottanoonsis, rise the
bluff twin summits of Old Walquitch, presiding over an unbroken and
almost untrodden wilderness. Some way up the southeasterly flank of
the loftier and more butting of the twin peaks ran a vast, open shelf,
or terrace, a kind of barren, whose swampy but austere soil bore no
growth but wiry bush. The green tips of this bushy growth were a
favoured "browse" of the caribou, who, though no lovers of the
heights, would often wander up from their shaggy and austere plains in
quest of this aromatic forage. But this lofty mountainside barren had
yet another attraction for the caribou. Close at its edge, just where
a granite buttress fell away steeply toward the lake, a tiny, almost
imperceptible spring, stained with iron and pungent with salt,
trickled out from among the roots of a dense, low thicket. Past the
bare spot made by these oozings, and round behind the thicket, led a
dim trail, worn by the feet of caribou, moose, bear, deer, and other
stealthy wayfarers. And to this spring, when the moon of the falling
leaves brought in the season of love and war, the caribou bulls were
wont to come, delighting to form their wallow in the pungent, salty
mud.

The bald twin peaks of Old Walquitch were ghostly white in the
flood of the full moon, just risen, and swimming like a globe of
witch's fire over the far, dark, wooded horizon. But the bushy
shelf and the spring by the thicket, were still in shadow. Along the
trail to the spring, moving noiselessly, yet with a confident
dignity, came a paler shadow, the shape of a huge, gray-white
caribou bull with wide-spreading antlers.

At the edge of the spring the bull stopped and began sniffing the
sharp-scented mud. Apparently he found no sign of a rival having
passed that way before him, or of a cow having kept tryst there.
Lifting his splendid head he stared all about him in the shadow, and
up at the bare, illuminated fronts of the twin peaks.

[Illustration: "HE 'BELLED' HARSHLY SEVERAL TIMES ACROSS THE DARK
WASTES."]

As the light spread down the mountain to the edge of the shelf, and
the moon rose into his view, he "belled" harshly several times across
the dark wastes outspread below him.

Receiving no answer to his defiance, the great bull turned his
attention again to the ooze around the spring. After sniffing it all
over he fell to furrowing it excitedly with the two lowermost
branches of his antlers,--short, broad, palmated projections thrust
out low over his forehead, and called by woodsmen "the ploughs." Every
few seconds he would toss his head fiercely, like an ordinary bull,
and throw the ooze over his shoulders. Then he pawed the cool,
strong-smelling stuff to what he seemed to consider a fitting
consistency, sniffed it over again, and raised his head to "bell"
a fresh challenge across the spacious solitudes. Receiving no answer,
he snorted in disgust, flung himself down on the trampled ooze,
and began to wallow with a sort of slow and intense vehemence,
grunting massively from time to time with volcanic emotion.

The wallow was now in the full flood of the moonlight. In that
mysterious illumination the caribou, encased in shining ooze, took on
the grotesque and enormous aspect of some monster of the prediluvian
slimes. Suddenly his wallowing stopped, and his antlers, dripping mud,
were lifted erect. For a few moments he was motionless as a rock,
listening. He had caught the snapping of a twig, in the trail below
the edge of the shelf. The sound was repeated; and he understood.
Blowing smartly, as if to clear the mud from about his nostrils, he
lurched to his feet, stalked forth from the wallow, and stood staring
arrogantly along the trail by which he had come. The next moment
another pair of antlers appeared; and then another bull, tall but
lean, and with long, spiky, narrow horns, mounted over the edge of the
shelf, and halted to eye the apparition before him.

The newcomer was of a darker hue than the lord of the wallow, and of
much slimmer build,--altogether less formidable in appearance. But he
looked very fit and fearless as, after a moment's supercilious survey
of his rival's ooze-dripping form, he came mincing forward to the
attack. The two, probably, had never seen each other before; but in
rutting season all caribou bulls are enemies at sight.

The white bull--no longer white now, but black and silver in the
moonlight--stood for some seconds quite motionless, his head low, his
broad and massive antlers thrust forward, his feet planted firmly and
apart. Ominous in his stillness, he waited till his light-stepping and
debonair adversary was within twenty feet of him. Then, with an
explosive blowing through his nostrils, he launched himself forward to
the attack.

Following the customary tactics of his kind, the second bull lowered
his antlers to receive the charge. But in the last fraction of a
breath before the crash, he changed his mind. Leaping aside with a
lightning alertness more like the action of a red buck than that of a
caribou, he just evaded the shock. At the same time two of the spiky
prongs of one antler ripped a long gash down his opponent's flank.

Amazed at this departure from the usual caribou tactics, and smarting
with the anguish of that punishing stroke, the white bull whirled in
his tracks, and charged again, blind with fury. The slim stranger had
already turned, and awaited him again, with lowered antlers in
readiness, close by the edge of the wallow. This time he seemed
determined to meet the shock squarely according to the rules of the
game--which apparently demand that the prowess of a caribou bull shall
be determined by his pushing power. But again he avoided, leaping
aside as if on springs; and again his sharp prongs furrowed his
enemy's flank. With a grunt of rage the latter plunged on into the
wallow, where he slipped forward upon his knees.

Had the newcomer been a little more resourceful he might now have
taken his adversary at a terrible disadvantage, and won an easy
victory. But he hesitated, being too much enamoured of his own method
of fighting; and in the moment of hesitation opportunity passed him
by. The white bull, recovering himself with suddenly awakened agility,
was on his feet and on guard again in an instant.

These two disastrous experiences, however, had added wariness and
wisdom to the great bull's fighting rage. His wound, his momentary
discomfiture, had opened his arrogant eyes to the fact that his
antagonist was a dangerous one. He stood vigilant and considering for
a few seconds, no longer with his feet planted massively for a
resistless rush, but balanced, and all his forces gathered well in
hand; while his elusive foe stepped lightly and tauntingly from side
to side before him, threateningly.

When the white bull made up his mind to attack again, instead of
charging madly to swab his foe off the earth, he moved forward at a
brisk stride, ready to check himself on the instant and block the
enemy's side stroke. Within a couple of yards of his opponent he
stopped short. The latter stood motionless, antlers lowered as before,
apparently quite willing to lock horns. But the white bull would not
be lured into a rush. Fiercely impatient he stamped the ground with a
broad, clacking forehoof.

Just at this moment, as if in response to the challenge of the hoof,
the stranger charged like lightning. But almost in the same motion he
swerved aside, seeking again to catch his adversary on the flank.
Swift and cunning as he was, however, the white bull was this time all
readiness. He whirled, head down. With a sharp, dry crash the two sets
of antlers came together, and locked.

That this should have happened was the irremediable mistake of the
slim stranger. In that close encounter, fury against fury, force
against force fairly pitted, his speed and his agility counted for
nothing. For a few seconds, indeed, in sheer desperation he succeeded
in withstanding his heavier and more powerful foe. With hind feet
braced far back, haunches strained, flank heaving and quivering, the
two held steady, staccato grunts and snorts attesting the ferocity of
their efforts. Then the hind foot of the younger bull slipped a
little. With a convulsive wrench he recovered his footing; and again
the struggle hung at poise. But it was only for a few moments.
Suddenly, as if he had felt his opportunity approach, the white bull
threw all his strength into a mightier thrust. The legs of his
adversary seemed to crumple up like paper beneath him.

This would have been the end of the young bull's battlings and
wooings; but as his good luck would have it, it was at the very edge
of the shelf that he collapsed. Disengaging his victorious antlers,
the conqueror thrust viciously and evisceratingly at the victim's
exposed flank. The latter was just struggling to rise, with precarious
foothold on the loose-turfed brink of the steep. As he writhed away
wildly from the goring points, the bushes and turf crumbled away, and
he fell backwards, rolling and crashing till he brought up, battered
but whole, in a sturdy thicket of young firs. Regaining his feet he
slunk off hurriedly into the dark of the woods. And the victor,
standing on the brink in the white glare of the moonlight, "belled"
his triumph hoarsely across the solemn spaces of the night.


II

A sound of footfalls, hesitating but apparently making no attempt at
concealment, came from the bend of the trail beyond the wallow; and
the great white bull wheeled savagely to see what was approaching. As
he glared, however, the angry ridge of hair cresting his neck sank
amiably. A young cow, attracted by his calls and the noise of the
battle, was coming around the thicket.

At the edge of the thicket, not a dozen paces from the black ooze-bed
of the wallow, the cow paused coyly, as if doubtful of her welcome.
She murmured in her throat, a sort of rough allurement which seemed to
the white bull's ears extraordinarily enticing. He answered, very
softly, and stepped forward a pace or two, inviting rather than
pursuing. Reassured, the young cow advanced confidently and eagerly to
meet him.

At this moment, out from the heart of the thicket plunged a towering
black form, with wide, snarling jaw's agleam in the moonlight. It
seemed to launch itself through the air, as if from a height. One
great, taloned paw struck the young cow full on the neck, a crashing
blow, shattering the vertebrae through all their armour of muscle.
With a groan the stricken cow sank down, her outstretched muzzle
smothered in the ooze of the wallow; and the monstrous bulk of the
bear fell upon her, tearing the warm flesh hungrily.

In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, the most hot-headed and
powerful bull of the caribou will shrink from trying conclusions with
a full grown black bear. The duel, as a rule, is too cruelly
one-sided. The bear, on the other hand, knows that a courageous bull
is no easy victim; and the monster ambuscaded in the thicket had been
waiting for one or both of the rivals to be disabled before making his
attack. The approach of the young cow had been an unexpected favour of
the Powers that order the wilderness; and in clutching his opportunity
he had scornfully and absolutely put the white bull out of the
reckoning.

But this bull was the exceptional one, the one that confounds
generalizations, and confirms the final supremacy of the unexpected.
He was altogether fearless, indifferent to odds, and just now flushed
with overwhelming victory. Moreover, he was aflame with mating ardour;
and the mate of his desire had just been brutally struck down before
his eyes. For a moment or two he stood bewildered, not daunted, but
amazed by the terrific apparition and the appalling event. Then a mad
fire raged through all his veins, his great muscles swelled, the stiff
hair on his neck and shoulders stood straight up, his eyes went
crimson--and without a sound he charged across the wallow.

When the bulls of the caribou kin fight each other, the weapons of
their sole dependence are their antlers. But when they fight alien
enemies they are wont to hold their heads high and strike with the
battering, knife-edged weapons of their fore-hoofs. The bear, crouched
upon his quivering prey, was too absorbed and too scornful to look for
any assault. The bull was upon him, therefore, before he had time to
guard his exposed flank. From the corner of his eye, he saw a big
glistening shape which reared suddenly above him, and, clever boxer
that he was, he threw up a ponderous forearm to parry the blow. But he
was too late. With all the force of some seven hundred pounds of
rage, avenging rage, behind him, these great hoofs, with their cutting
edges, came down upon his side, smashing in several ribs, and gashing
a wide wound down into his loins. The shock was so terrific that his
own counter stroke, usually so swift and unerring, went wild
altogether, and he was sent rolling clear of the body of his prey.

Instantly upon delivering his stroke, the white bull had pranced
lightly aside, knowing well enough the swift and deadly effectiveness
of a bear's paw. But he struck yet again, almost, it seemed, in the
same breath, and just as the bear was struggling up upon his haunches.
Frantically, out of his astonishment, fury, and pain, the bear
attempted to guard. He succeeded, indeed, in warding off those deadly
hoofs from his flank; but he caught an almost disabling blow on the
point of the left shoulder, putting his left forearm out of business.
With a squawling grunt he swung about upon his haunches, bringing his
right toward the enemy, and sat up, savagely but anxiously defensive.

Sore wounded though he was, the bear was not yet beaten. One fair
buffet of his right paw, could he but land it in the proper place,--on
nose, or neck, or leg--might yet give him the victory, and let him
crawl off to nurse his hurts in some dense covert, leaving his broken
foe to die in the wallow. But the white bull, though he had underrated
his former antagonist, was in no danger of misprizing this one. He was
now as wary as he had, in the previous case, been rash. Moreover, he
had had a dreadful object lesson in the power of the bear's paw. The
body of the cow before him kept him from forgetting.

Stepping restlessly from side to side, threatening now with hoof and
now with antlers, he seemed each instant upon the point of a fresh
attack; and the bear, with swaying muzzle and blazing, shifting eyes,
kept following his every motion. Again and again he gathered his
muscles for a fresh charge--but each time he checked himself with a
realization that the body of the slain cow was exactly in his way,
hampering his avoidance of a counter-stroke.

After some minutes of this feinting, the caribou stood still,
deliberating some new move. Instantly the bear, also, became
motionless as a stone. The sudden peace was like a shock of
enchantment, a violent sorcery, and over it the blue-white, flooding
shine of the moonlight seemed to take on some sinister significance.
The seconds lengthened out as a nightmare, till at last the stupendous
stillness was broken by the wild clamour of a loon, far down on the
lake. As the distant cry shrilled up the mountainside, the white bull
stirred, shook his antlers, and blew loudly through his nostril. It
was a note of challenge--but in it the bear divined a growing
hesitancy. Perhaps, after all, this fight, which had gone so sorely
against him, might not have to be fought out! He dropped, whirled
about so quietly one could hardly follow the motion--and in a flash
was up again on his haunches, right paw uplifted, eyes blazing
vigilant defiance. But he had retreated several feet in that swift
manoeuvre! His move was a confusion of defeat--but his attitude was a
warning that he was dangerous in defeat. The bull followed, but only
for a couple of steps, which brought him so that he bestrode the body
of the cow. Here he halted, still threatening; and again the two
confronted each other motionlessly.

This time, however, the spell was broken by the bear himself. Suddenly
he repeated his former manoeuvre; and again turned to face his
adversary. But the bull did not follow. Without a movement he stood,
as if content with his victory. And after a few moments the bear, as
if realizing that the fight was over, flung himself aside from the
trail and went limping off painfully through the bushes, keeping a
watchful eye over his shoulder till he vanished into a bunch of dense
spruce against the mountainside.

[Illustration: "IN A FLASH WAS UP AGAIN ON HIS HAUNCHES."]

The white bull eyed his going proudly. Then he looked down at the torn
and lifeless body between his feet. He had not really taken note of it
before. Now he bent his head and sniffed at it with wondering
interrogation. The spreading blood, still warm, smote his nostrils;
and all at once, it seemed, death and the fear of death were borne in
upon his arrogant heart. He tossed his head, snorting wildly, flung
himself clear of the uncomprehended, dreadful thing upon the ground,
bounded over the wallow as if it, too, had grown terrifying, and fled
away up the trail through the merciless, unconcealing moonlight, till
he reached the end of the open shelf and a black wood hid his sudden
fear of the unknown.




Sonny and the Kid


THE little old gray house, with its gray barn and low wagon shed,
stood in the full sun at the top of a gullied and stony lane. Behind
it the ancient forest, spruce and fir and hemlock, came down and
brooded darkly over the edge of the rough, stump-strewn pasture. The
lane, leading up to the house from the main road, climbed between a
sloping buckwheat field on the one hand and a buttercupped meadow on
the other. On either side of the lane, cutting it off from the fields,
straggled a zigzag snake fence, with milk-weed, tansy, and mullein
growing raggedly in its corners.

At the head of the lane, where it came out upon the untidy but homely
looking yard, stood a largish black and tan dog, his head on one side,
his ears cocked, his short stub of a tail sticking out straight and
motionless, tense with expectation. He was staring at a wagon which
came slowly along the main road, drawn by a jogging, white-faced
sorrel. The expression in the dog's eyes was that of a hope so eager
that nothing but absolute certainty could permit him to believe in its
approaching fulfilment. His mouth was half open, as if struggling to
aid his vision.

He was an odd looking beast, formidable in his sturdy strength and his
massiveness of jaw; and ugly beyond question, but for the alert
intelligence of his eyes. A palpable mongrel, he showed none the less
that he had strains of distinction in his ancestry. English bull
was the blood most clearly proclaimed, in his great chest, short,
crooked legs, fine coat, and square, powerful head. His pronounced
black and tan seemed to betray some beagle kinship, as did his long,
close-haired ears. Whoever had docked his tail, in his defenceless
puppyhood, had evidently been too tender-hearted to cut those
silken and sensitive ears. So Sonny had been obliged to face life
in the incongruous garb of short tail and long ears--which is almost
as unpardonable as yellow shoes with a top hat.

When the wagon drew close to the foot of the lane, Sonny was still
uncertain. There might be other white faced sorrels than lazy old
Bill. The man in the wagon certainly looked like his beloved master,
Joe Barnes; but Joe Barnes was always alone on the wagon-seat, while
this man had a child beside him, a child with long, bright, yellow
hair and a little red cap. This to Sonny was a bewildering phenomenon.
But when at last the wagon turned up the lane, his doubts were finally
resolved. His stub of a tail jerked spasmodically, in its struggle to
wag. Then with two or three delirious yelps of joy he started madly
down the lane. At the sound of his voice the door of the gray house
opened. A tall, thin woman in a bluish homespun skirt and red calico
waist came out, and moved slowly across the yard to welcome the new
arrivals.

When Sonny, yelping and dancing, met the creaking wagon as it bumped
its way upward over the gullies, his master greeted him with a "Hello,
Sonny!" as usual; but to the dog's quick perception there was a
difference in his tone, a difference that was almost an indifference.
Joe Barnes was absorbed. At other times, he was wont to seem warmly
interested in Sonny's welcoming antics, and would keep up a running
fire of talk with him while the old sorrel plodded up the lane.
To-day, however, Joe's attention was occupied by the yellow-haired
child beside him; and Sonny's demonstrations, he knew not why, became
perceptibly less ecstatic. It was of no consequence whatever to him
that the child stared at him with dancing eyes and cried delightedly,
"Oh, Unc' Joe, what a pretty doggie! Oh, what a nice doggie! Can I
have him, Unc' Joe?"

"All right, Kid," said Joe Barnes, gazing down adoringly upon the
little red cap; "he's yourn. His name's Sonny, an' he's the best dawg
ever chased a chipmunk. He'll love ye, Kid, most as much as yer old
Unc' Joe an' Aunt Ann does."

When the yard was reached, the tall woman in the red calico waist was
at the side of the wagon before the driver's "Whoa!" brought the horse
to a stop. The little one was snatched down from the seat and hugged
vehemently to her heart.

"Poor lamb! Precious lamb!" she murmured. "I'll be a mother to you,
please God!"

"I want my mummie! Where's she gone to?" cried the child, suddenly
reminded of a loss which he was beginning to forget. But his aunt
changed the subject hastily.

"Ain't he the livin' image of Jim?" she demanded in a voice of
wondering admiration. "Did ever you see the likes of it, father?"

Under the pretence of examining him more critically, Joe took the
child into his own arms, and looked at him with ardent eyes. "Yes,"
said he, "the Kid does favour Jim, more'n his--" But he checked
himself at the word. "An' he's a regular little man too!" he went on.
"Come all the way up on the cars by himself, an' wasn't a mite o'
trouble, the conductor said."

Utterly engrossed in the little one, neither Joe nor his wife gave a
look or a thought to Sonny, who was leaping upon them joyously. For
years he had been almost the one centre of attention for the childless
couple, who had treated him as a child, caressing him, spoiling him,
and teaching him to feel his devotion necessary to them. Now, finding
himself quite ignored, he quieted down all at once and stood for a few
seconds gazing reproachfully at the scene. The intimacy with Joe and
Ann which he had so long enjoyed had developed almost a human quality
in his intelligence and his feelings. Plainly, now, he was forgotten.
His master and mistress had withdrawn their love and were pouring it
out upon this stranger child. His ears and stub tail drooping in
misery, he turned away, walked sorrowfully over to the horse, and
sniffed at the latter's nose as if to beg for some explanation of
what had happened. But the old sorrel, pleasantly occupied in cropping
at the short, sweet grass behind the well, had neither explanation nor
sympathy to offer. Sonny went off to his kennel, a place he scorned to
notice, as a rule, because the best in the house had hitherto been
held none too good for him. Creeping in with a beaten air, he lay down
with his nose on his paws in the doorway, and tried to understand what
had come upon him. One thing only was quite clear to him. It was all
the fault of the child with the yellow curls.

Sonny had had no experience with children. The few he had met he had
regarded with that impersonal benevolence which was his attitude
toward all humanity. His formidable appearance had saved him from
finding out that humanity could be cruel and brutal. So now, in his
unhappiness, he had no jealous anger. He simply wanted to keep away
from this small being who had caused his hurt.

But even this grace was not to be allowed him. By the time Joe Barnes
and Ann, both trying to hold the little one in their arms at the same
time, had made their impeded way to the house, the little one had
begun to find their ardour a shade embarrassing. To him there were
lots of things better than being hugged and kissed. This shining green
backwoods world was quite new to his city born eyes, and he wanted to
find out all about it, at once, for himself. He began struggling
vigorously to get down out of the imprisoning arms.

"Put me down, Unc' Joe!" he demanded. "I want to play with my
doggie."

"All right, Kid," responded Joe, complying instantly. "Here Sonny,
Sonny, come an' git acquainted with the Kid!"

"Yes, come and see the Kid, Sonny!" reëchoed the woman, devouring the
little yellow head with her eyes. His real name was Alfred, but Joe
had called him "the Kid," and that was to be his appellation
thenceforth.

Hearing his name called, Sonny emerged from his kennel and came
forward, but not with his wonted eagerness. Very soberly, but with
prompt obedience he came, and thrust his massive head under Joe's hand
for the accustomed caress. But the caress was not forthcoming. Joe
simply forgot it, so absorbed was he, his gaunt, weather-beaten face
glowing and melting with smiles as he gazed at the child.

"Here's your dawg, Kid!" said he, and watched delightedly to see how
the little one would go about asserting proprietorship.

The woman was the more subtle of the two in her sympathies. "Sonny,"
she said, pulling the dog forward, "here's the Kid, yer little master.
See you mind what he tells you, and see you take good keer o' him."

Sonny wagged his tail obediently, his load of misery lightening under
the touch of his mistress's hand. He leaned against her knees,
comforted for a moment, though his love was more for the man than for
her. But he would not look at the Kid. He shut his eyes with an
expression of endurance as the little one's hand patted him vehemently
on the face, and his stub tail stopped wagging. In a dim way he
recognized that he must not be uncivil to this small stranger who had
so instantaneously and completely usurped his place. But beyond this
he could think of nothing but his master, who had grown indifferent.
Suddenly, with a burst of longing for reconciliation, he jerked
abruptly away from the child's hands, wriggled in between Joe's legs,
and strove to climb up and lick his face.

At the look of disappointment which passed over the child's face Joe
Barnes felt a sudden rush of anger. Stupidly misunderstanding, he
thought that Sonny was merely trying to avoid the child. He
straightened up his tall figure, snatched the little one to his
breast, and exclaimed in a harsh voice, "If ye can't be nice to the
Kid, git out!"

The words "Git out!" with the tone in which they were uttered, would
have been comprehensible to a much meaner intelligence than Sonny's.
As if he had been whipped, he curled down his abbreviated tail, and
ran and hid himself in his kennel.

"Sonny didn't mean to be ugly to the Kid, father," protested Ann, "He
jest don't quite understand the situation yet, an' he's wonderin' why
ye don't make so much of him as ye used to. I don't blame him fer
feelin' a leetle mite left out in the cold."

Joe felt a vague suspicion that Ann might be right; but it was a very
vague suspicion, just enough to make him feel uneasy and put him on
the defensive. Being obstinate and something of a crank, this only
added heat to his irritation. "I ain't got no use fer any dawg that
don't know enough to take to a kid on sight!" he declared, readjusting
the little red cap on the child's curls.

[Illustration: "HE CURLED DOWN HIS ABBREVIATED TAIL, AND RAN."]

"Of course, father," acquiesced Ann discreetly; "but you'll find
Sonny'll be all right."

Here the child, who had been squirming with impatience, piped up, "I
want to go an' see my doggie in his little house!" he declared.

"Oh, no, Kid, we're goin' to let Sonny be fer a bit. We're goin' to
see the calf, the pretty black an' white calf, round back o' the barn,
now. You go along with Aunty Ann while I onhitch old Bill. An' then
we'll all go an' see the little pigs."

His mind altogether diverted by the suggestion of such strange
delights, the little fellow trotted off joyously with Ann, while Joe
Barnes led the old sorrel to the barn, grumbling to himself at what he
chose to call Sonny's "ugliness" in not making friends with the Kid.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From that hour Sonny's life was changed. In fact, it seemed to him no
longer life at all. His master's indifference grew swiftly to an
unreasoning anger against him; and as he fretted over it continually,
a malicious fate seemed to delight in putting him, or leading him to
put himself, ever in the wrong. Absorbed in longing for his master, he
hardly thought of the child at all. Several times, in a blundering
effort to make things right with Sonny and the Kid, Joe seated himself
on the back doorstep, took the little one on his knee, and called
Sonny to come and make friends. At the sound of the loved summons
Sonny shot out from the kennel, which had become his constant refuge,
tore wildly across the yard, and strove, in a sort of ecstasy, to show
his forgiveness and his joy by climbing into Joe's lap. Being a large
dog, and the lap already filled, this meant roughly crowding out the
Kid, of whose very existence, at this moment, Sonny was unaware. But
to the obtuse man Sonny's action seemed nothing more than a mean and
jealous effort to supplant the Kid.

To the Kid this proceeding of Sonny's was a fine game. He would
grapple with the dog, hug him, pound him gleefully with his little
fists, and call him every pet name he knew.

But the man would rise to his feet angrily, and cry, "If that's all
ye're good fer, git! Git out, I tell ye!" And Sonny, heartsore and
bewildered, would shrink back hopelessly to his kennel. When this, or
something much like it, had happened several times, even Ann, for all
her finer perceptions, began to feel that Sonny might be a bit nicer
to the Kid, and, as a consequence, to stint her kindness. But to
Sonny, sunk in his misery and pining only for that love which his
master had so inexplicably withdrawn from him, it mattered little
whether Ann was neglectful or not.

Uneventfully day followed day on the lonely backwoods farm. To Sonny,
the discarded, the discredited, they were all hopeless days, dark and
interminable. But to the Kid they were days of wonder, every one. He
loved the queer black and white pigs, which he studied intently
through the cracks in the boarding of their pen. He loved the calf,
and the three velvet-eyed cows, and the two big red oxen, inseparable
yoke fellows. The chickens were an inexhaustible interest to him; and
so were the airy throngs of buttercups afloat on the grass, and the
yet more aërial troops of the butterflies flickering above them, white
and brown and red and black and gold and yellow and maroon. But in the
last choice he loved best of all the silent, unresponsive Sonny, of
whose indifference he seemed quite unaware. Sonny, lying on the grass,
would look at him soberly, submit to his endearments without one
answering wag of the tail, and at last, after the utmost patience that
courtesy could require, would slowly get up, yawn, and stroll off to
his kennel or to some pretended business behind the barn. His big
heart harboured no resentment against the child, whom he knew to be a
child and irresponsible. His resentment was all against fate, or life,
or whatever it was, the vague, implacable force which was causing Joe
Barnes to hurt him. For Joe Barnes he had only sorrow and hungry
devotion.

Little by little, however, Sonny's lonely and sorrowful heart, in
spite of itself, was beginning to warm toward the unconscious child.
Though still outwardly indifferent, he began to feel gratified rather
than bored when the Kid came up and gaily disturbed his slumbers by
pounding him on the head with his little palm and tumbling over his
sturdy back. It was a mild gratification, however, and seemed to call
for no demonstrative expression.

Then, one noon, he chanced to be lying, heavy-hearted, some ten or a
dozen paces in front of the kitchen door, while Joe Barnes sat on the
doorstep smoking his after-dinner pipe, and Ann bustled through the
dish washing. At such times, in the old happy days, Sonny's place had
always been at Joe Barnes's feet; but those times seemed to have been
forgotten by Joe Barnes, who had the Kid beside him. Suddenly, tired
of sitting still, the little one jumped up and ran over to Sonny.
Sonny resolutely pretended to be asleep. Laughingly the child sprawled
over him, pulled his ears gently, then tried to push open his eyes. A
little burst of warmth gushed up in Sonny's sad heart. With a swift
impulse he lifted his muzzle and licked the Kid, a generous, ample
lick across the face.

Alas! as blundering fate would have it, the Kid's face was closer than
Sonny had imagined. He not only licked it, but at the same time bumped
it violently with his wet muzzle. Taken by surprise and half-dazed,
the Kid drew back with a sharp little "Oh!" His eyes grew very wide,
and for an instant his mouth quivered as if he was going to cry. This
was all Joe Barnes saw. Springing to his feet, with a smothered oath,
he ran, caught the Kid up in his arms, and gave Sonny a fierce kick in
the ribs which sent him rushing back to his kennel with a howl of
grief and pain.

Ann had come running from the house in amazement. The Kid was sobbing,
and struggling to get down from Joe's arms.

Ann snatched him away anxiously. "What did Sonny do to ye, the bad
dawg!" she demanded.

"He ain't bad. He's good. He jest kissed me too hard!" protested the
little one indignantly.

"He hurt the Kid's face. I ain't right sure but what he snapped at
him," said Joe Barnes.

"He didn't hurt me! He didn't mean to," went on the Kid.

"Of course he didn't," said Ann with conviction. "Father, ye're too
hard on the dawg. Ye hadn't oughter have kicked him."

An obstinate look settled on Joe Barnes's face. "Yes, I had, too. 'N'
he'll be gittin' more'n that, ef he don't l'arn not to be ugly to the
Kid," he retorted harshly. Then, with an uneasy sense that, whether
right or wrong, he was in the minority, he returned to the doorstep
and moodily resumed his smoking. Ann called Sonny many times to come
out and get his dinner. But Sonny, broken-hearted, and the ruins of
all his life and love and trust tumbled about his ears, would not hear
her. He was huddled in the back of his kennel, with his nose jammed
down into the corner.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Two days later it happened that both Joe and Ann went down together
into the field in front of the house to weed the carrot patch. They
left the Kid asleep in his trundle bed, in the little room off the
kitchen. When they were gone, Sonny came out of his kennel and lay
down in the middle of the yard, where he could keep a watchful eye on
everything belonging to Joe Barnes.

It was the Kid's invariable custom to sleep soundly for a good two
hours of the early afternoon. On this afternoon, however, he broke his
custom. Joe and Ann had not been ten minutes away, when he appeared in
the kitchen door, his yellow hair tousled, his cheeks rosy, his plump
fists trying to rub the sleep out of his eyes. His face was aggrieved,
because he had woke up and found himself alone. But at the sight of
Sonny the grievance was forgotten. He ran to the dog and began to maul
him joyously.

His recent bitter experience raw in his heart, Sonny did not dare
to respond, but lay with his nose on his paws, unstirring, while
the child sprawled over him. After a few minutes this utter
unresponsiveness chilled even the Kid's enthusiasm. He jumped up and
cast his eyes about in search of some diversion more exciting. His
glance wandered out past the barn and up the pasture toward the
edge of the forest. A squirrel, sitting on a black stump in the
pasture, suddenly began jumping about and shrilly chattering. This
was something quite new and very interesting. The Kid crawled
through the bars and started up the pasture as fast as his sturdy
little legs could carry him.

The squirrel saw him coming, but knowing very well that he was not
dangerous, held his ground, bouncing up and down on the stump in
vociferous excitement. When the Kid was within three feet of him, he
gave a wild "K-r-r-r-r!" of derision, and sprang to another stump.
With eyes dancing and eager little hands outstretched, the Kid
followed--again and again, and yet again--till he was led to the very
edge of the wood. Then the mocking imp in red fur whisked up an
ancient hemlock, and hid himself, in silence, in a high crotch, tired
of the game.

At the edge of the woods the Kid stopped, peering in among the shadows
with mingled curiosity and awe. The bright patches of sunlight on the
brown forest floor and on the scattered underbrush allured him.
Presently, standing out in conspicuous isolation, a great crimson
toadstool caught his eye. He wanted the beautiful thing intensely, to
play with. But he was afraid. Leaning his face against the old fence,
he gazed through desirously. But the silence made him more and more
afraid. If only the squirrel would come back and play with him, he
would not be afraid. He was on the point of giving up the beautiful
crimson toadstool and turning back home, when he saw a little gray
bird hopping amid the lower limbs of a spruce in among the shadows.
"Tsic-a-dee-dee!" whistled the little gray bird, blithely and
reassuringly. At once the shadows and the stillness lost their
terrors. The Kid squeezed boldly through the fence and started in for
the glowing toadstool.

Just as he reached the coloured thing and stooped to seize it, a sharp
"Tzip, tzip!" and a rustling of stiff feathers startled him. Looking
up, he saw a bright-eyed brown bird running hither and thither before
him, trailing one wing on the ground as if unable to fly. It was such
a pretty bird! And it seemed so tame! The Kid felt sure he could catch
it. Grabbing up the crimson toadstool, and holding it clutched to his
bosom with one hand, he ran eagerly after the brown bird. The bird, a
wily old hen partridge, bent on leading the intruder away from her
hidden brood, kept fluttering laboriously on just beyond his reach,
till she came to a dense patch of underbrush. She was just about to
dive into this thicket, when she leaped into the air, instead, with a
frightened squawk, and whirred up into the branches of a lofty birch
near by.

Bitterly disappointed, the Kid gazed up after her, still clutching the
bright toadstool to his breast. Then, by instinct rather than by
reason, he dropped his eyes to the thicket, and stared in to see what
had frightened away the pretty brown bird.

At first he could see nothing. But to his sensitive little nerves came
a feeling that something was there. Gradually his eyes, accustoming
themselves to the gloom, began to disentangle substance and shadow.
Then suddenly he detected the form of a gray crouching animal. He saw
its tufted ears, its big round face, with mouth half open grinningly.
Its great, round, pale, yellow green eyes were staring straight at
him.

In his fright the Kid dropped his toadstool and stared back at the
gray animal. His first impulse was to turn and run; but, somehow, he
was afraid to do that--afraid to turn his back on the pale-eyed,
crouching shape. As he gazed, trembling, he saw that the animal looked
like a huge gray cat.

[Illustration: "IN HIS FRIGHT THE KID DROPPED HIS TOADSTOOL AND STARED
BACK AT THE GRAY ANIMAL."]

At this thought he felt a trifle reassured. Cats were kind, and nice
to play with. A big cat wouldn't hurt him, he felt quite sure of that.
But when, after a minute or two of moveless glaring, the big cat,
never taking its round eyes from his face, began to creep straight
toward him, stealthily, without a sound, then his terror all came
back. In the extremity of his fear he burst out crying, not very loud,
but softly and pitifully, as if he hardly knew what he was doing. His
little hands hanging straight down at his sides, his head bent
slightly forward, he stood helplessly staring at this strange,
terrible cat creeping toward him through the thicket.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Sonny, meanwhile, had grown uneasy the moment the Kid climbed through
the bars into the pasture. The Kid had never gone into the pasture
before. Sonny got up, turned round, and lay down in such a position
that he could see just what the child was doing. He knew the little
one belonged to Joe Barnes; and he could not let anything belonging to
Joe Barnes get lost or run away. When the Kid reached the edge of the
woods and stood looking through the fence, then Sonny roused himself,
and started up the pasture in a leisurely, indifferent way, as if it
was purely his own whim that took him in that direction. He pretended
not to see the Kid at all. But in reality he was watching, with an
anxious intentness, every move the little one made. He was determined
to do his duty by Joe Barnes.

But when at last the Kid wriggled through the fence and darted into
the gloom of the forest, Sonny's solicitude became more personal. He
knew that the forest was a place of many strange perils. It was no
place for the Kid. A sudden fear seized him at thought of what might
happen to the Kid, there in the great and silent shadows. He broke
into a frantic run, scrambled through the fence, picked up the little
adventurer's trail, and darted onward till he caught sight of the
Kid's bright curly head, apparently intent on gazing into a thicket.
At the sight he stopped abruptly, then sauntered forward with a
careless air, as if it was the most ordinary chance in the world that
he should come across the Kid, away off here alone.

Instinctively, under the subtle influence of the forest silence, Sonny
went forward softly, on his toes, though anything like stealth was
altogether foreign to him. As he crept up, he wondered what it was in
the thicket to keep him so still. There was something mysterious about
it. The hair began to rise along Sonny's back. Then, a moment later,
he heard the Kid crying. There was no mistaking the note of terror in
that hopeless, helpless little sound. Sonny did not need to reason
about it; his heart understood all that was necessary. Something was
frightening the Kid. His white teeth bared themselves, and he darted
forward.

At this instant there came a crackling and swishing in the thicket;
and the Kid, as if released from a spell, turned with a scream and
started to flee. He tripped on a root, however, and fell headlong on
his face, his yellow curls mixing with the brown twigs and fir
needles. Almost in the selfsame second a big gray lynx burst from the
green of the underbrush and sprang upon the little, sprawling,
helpless form.

But not actually upon it. Those outstretching, murderous claws never
actually sank into the Kid's flesh. For Sonny was there just as soon
as the lynx was. The wild beast changed its mind, and attack, just in
time to avoid being taken at a serious disadvantage. The rush of
Sonny's heavy body bore it backward clear of the Kid. The latter
scrambled to his feet, stifled his sobs, and stared open-mouthed at
the sudden fury of battle which confronted him.

Had Sonny not been endowed with intelligence as well as valour, he
would have fallen victim almost at once to his adversary's terrific,
raking hind claws. But fortunately, during his pugnacious puppyhood he
had had several encounters with war-wise, veteran cats. To him, the
lynx was obviously a huge and particularly savage cat. He knew the
deadly power of its hind claws, with all the strength of those great
hind quarters behind them. As he grappled with the screeching lynx,
silently, after the fashion of his bull ancestors, he received a
ripping slash from one of its armed fore paws, but succeeded in fixing
his grip on the base of the beast's neck, not far from the throat.
Instantly he drew himself backward with all his weight, crouching
flat, and dragging the enemy down with him.

In this position, Sonny, backing and pulling with all his strength,
the spitting and screeching cat was unable to bring its terrible
hinder claws into play. The claws of the beast's great fore paws,
however, were doing cruel work on Sonny's back and sides; while its
long fangs, pointed like daggers, tore savagely at the one point on
his shoulder which they could reach. This terrible punishment Sonny
took stoically, caring only to protect the tender under part of his
body and his eyes. His close grip on the base of the animal's neck
shielded his eyes, and, according to the custom of his tenacious
breed, he never relaxed his hold for a moment, but kept chewing in,
chewing in, inexorably working his way to a final, fatal grip upon the
throat. And not for a moment, either, did he desist from his steady
backward pull, which kept the foe from doubling upon him with its hind
quarters.

For several minutes the furious struggle went on, Sonny, apparently,
getting all the worst of it. His back and shoulders were pouring
blood; while his enemy showed not a hurt. Then suddenly the gray
beast's screeching took on a half strangling sound. With its mouth
wide open it ceased to bite, though its fore paws raked and clawed
more desperately than ever. Sonny's relentless hold was beginning to
throttle. His mouth was now too full of long fur and loose skin for
him to bite clean through the throat and finish the fight. But he felt
himself already the victor.

Suddenly, as he continued that steady backward drag, the resistance
ceased. The lynx had launched itself forward in one last convulsive
struggle to free itself from those strangling teeth at its throat. For
a second or two Sonny felt himself overwhelmed, engulfed, in a vortex
of rending claws. In a tight ball of hate and ferocity and horror the
two rolled over and over in the underbrush. Sonny, doubled up hard to
protect his belly, heard a shrill cry of fear from the Kid. At the
sound he summoned into his strained nerves and muscles a strength
beyond the utmost which he had yet been able to put forth. His jaws
worked upward, secured a cleaner grip, ground slowly closer; and at
last his teeth crunched together. A great shudder shook the body of
the lynx. It straightened out, limp and harmless.

For perhaps a minute Sonny maintained his triumphant grip, shaking the
foe savagely. Satisfied, at last, that he was meeting with no more
resistance, he let go, stood off, and eyed the body with searching
suspicion. Then he turned to the Kid. The Kid, careless of the blood
and wounds, kissed him fervently on the nose, called him "Poor Sonny!
Dear, good Sonny!" and burst into a loud wailing.

Knowing that the one thing now was to get the Kid home again as soon
as possible, Sonny started, looking back, and uttering a little
imperative bark. The Kid understood, and followed promptly. By the
time they reached the fence, however, Sonny was so weak from loss of
blood he could hardly climb through. The Kid, with blundering but
loving efforts, helped him. Then he lay down.

At this moment the voices of Joe and Ann were heard, shouting, calling
wildly, from the yard. At the sound, Sonny struggled to his feet and
staggered on, the Kid keeping close beside him. But he could manage
only a few steps. Then he sank down again.

The man and woman came running up the pasture, calling the Kid; but
the latter would not leave Sonny. He trotted forward a few steps, and
stopped, shaking his head and looking back. When Joe and Ann came near
enough to see that the little one's face and hair and clothes were
splotched with blood, fear clutched at their hearts. "My God! what's
happened to him?" gasped Ann, striving to keep up with her husband's
pace. But Joe was too quick for her. Darting ahead, he seized the
little one, lifted him up, and searched his face with frantic eyes.
For all the blood, the child seemed well and vigorous.

"What's it mean, Kid? Ye ain't hurt--ye ain't hurt--tell me ye
ain't hurt, Kid! What's all this blood all over ye?" he demanded
breathlessly.

By this time Ann was at his side, questioning with terrified eyes.

"Tain't me, Unc' Joe!" protested the Kid. "I ain't hurted. It's poor
Sonny. He's hurted awful. He killed the great, big--great, big--" the
Kid was at a loss how to explain, "the great, big, dreadful cat, what
was goin' to eat me up, Sonny did."

Joe Barnes looked at the dog, the torn sides, streaming red wounds,
and bloody muzzle. Woodsman that he was, he understood. "Sonny!" he
cried in a piercing voice. The dog raised his head, wagged his stump
of a tail feebly, and made a futile effort to rise.

Gulping down something in his throat, Joe Barnes handed the child over
to Ann, and strode to Sonny's side. Bending over him, he tenderly
gathered the big dog into his arms, holding him like a baby. Sonny
reached up and licked his chin. Joe turned and hastened back to the
old gray house with his burden.

"Come along, mother," he said, his voice a little unsteady. "You'll
have to look out for the Kid all by yerself for a bit now. I reckon
I'm goin' to hev' about all I kin do, a-nursin' Sonny."

THE END




SIX STAR RANCH

Another success by the author of the wonderful GLAD Books:

"Pollyanna: The GLAD Book"

"Pollyanna Grows Up: The Second GLAD Book"

With frontispiece in full color from a painting by R. Farrington Elwell
and six spirited drawings by Frank J. Murch. Bound uniform with the
POLLYANNA books in silk cloth, with a corresponding color jacket, net
$1.25; carriage paid $1.40

The year we published POLLYANNA, THE GLAD BOOK, we published another book
by the same author, but as it is contrary to our policy to issue two books
by one writer in a year, we published the second book under the pseudonym
"Eleanor Stuart."

As we are not going to publish a new book of Mrs. Porter's this year, we
have decided to announce the publication of SIX STAR RANCH under the name
of its real author. The success of her previous books is practically
unparalleled in the history of American publishing, POLLYANNA: THE GLAD
BOOK, having already sold 300,000 copies--an average of more than 100,000
copies for three consecutive years--and POLLYANNA GROWS UP: THE SECOND
GLAD BOOK, having sold nearly 150,000 copies in nine months.

SIX STAR RANCH is a charming story, in the author's best vein, of a dear
little Texas girl, who plays "the glad game" made famous by POLLYANNA,
and plays it with a charm which will put her on the same pinnacle, side by
side with POLLYANNA.




THE VIOLIN LADY

A Sequel to "The Fiddling Girl" and "The Proving of Virginia"

By Daisy Rhodes Campbell

Frontispiece in full color from a painting by F. W. Read, and six black
and white illustrations by John Goss, decorative jacket, net $1.25;
carriage paid $1.40

This new story continues the adventures of the once little Fiddling Girl
and tells of her triumphs and hardships abroad, of her friends, her love
affairs, and finally of Virginia's wedding bells and return to America.
The previous two books in this series have been pronounced excellent and
uplift stories, but "The Violin Lady" is far ahead of both in interest and
charm.

The press has commented on the author's previous stories as follows:

"A delightful story told in a charming manner. The Page Company does a
real service indeed in the publication of so many of these excellent
stories."--Zion's Herald, Boston.

"A thoroughly enjoyable tale, written in a delightful vein of sympathetic
comprehension."--Boston Herald.




THE GIRL FROM THE BIG HORN COUNTRY

By Mary Ellen Chase

12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated by R. Farrington Elwell, net $1.25;
carriage paid $1.40

At the beginning of the story, Virginia Hunter, a bright, breezy,
frank-hearted "girl of the Golden West," comes out of the Big Horn country
of Wyoming to the old Bay State. Then "things begin," when Virginia,--who
feels the joyous, exhilarating call of the Big Horn wilderness and the
outdoor life,--attempts to become acclimated and adopt good old New
England "ways."

Few stories reveal a more attractive heroine, and the joyous spirit of
youth and its happy adventures give the story an unusual charm.

"The book has natural characters, fresh incidents, and a general
atmosphere of sincerity and wholesome understanding of girl nature.
Virginia may well become as popular as 'Miss Billy' or irresistible
Anne."--New York Sun.




SYLVIA OF THE HILL TOP

A Sequel to "Sylvia's Experiment, The Cheerful Book"

By Margaret R. Piper

12mo, cloth decorative, with a frontispiece in full color, decorative
jacket, net $1.25; carriage paid $1.40

In THE CHEERFUL BOOK Sylvia Arden proved herself a messenger of joy and
cheerfulness to thousands of readers. In this new story she plays the same
rôle on Arden Hill during her summer vacation and is the same wholesome,
generous, cheerful young lady who made such a success of the Christmas
Party. She befriends sick neighbors, helps "run" a tea-room, brings
together two lovers who have had differences, serves as the convenient
bridesmaid here and the good Samaritan there, and generally acquits
herself in a manner which made of her such a popular heroine in the former
story. There is, of course, a Prince Charming in the background.

"The SYLVIA books should be read by all the exponents of POLLYANNA of THE
GLAD BOOKS," says Mr. H. V. Meyer of the American Baptist Publication
Society.




Selections from The Page Company's List of Fiction

WORKS OF ELEANOR H. PORTER

POLLYANNA: The GLAD Book (340,000)

Cloth decorative, illustrated by Stockton Mulford. Net, $1.25; carriage
paid, $1.40

Mr. Leigh Mitchell Hodges, The Optimist, in an editorial for the
Philadelphia North American, says: "And when, after Pollyanna has gone
away, you get her letter saying she is going to take 'eight steps'
to-morrow--well, I don't know just what you may do, but I know of one
person who buried his face in his hands and shook with the gladdest sort
of sadness and got down on his knees and thanked the Giver of all gladness
for Pollyanna."

POLLYANNA GROWS UP: The Second GLAD Book

Cloth decorative, illustrated by H. Weston Taylor. Net, 1.25; carriage
paid, $1.40

When the story of POLLYANNA told in The Glad Book was ended a great cry of
regret for the vanishing "Glad Girl" went up all over the country--and
other countries, too. Now POLLYANNA appears again, just as sweet and
joyous-hearted, more grown up and more lovable.

"Take away frowns! Put down the worries! Stop fidgeting and disagreeing
and grumbling! Cheer up, everybody! POLLYANNA has come back!"--Christian
Herald.

The GLAD Book Calendar

THE POLLYANNA CALENDAR

(This calendar is issued annually; the calendar for the new year being
ready about Sept. 1st of the preceding year. Note: in ordering please
specify what year you desire.)

Decorated and printed in colors. Net, $1.50; carriage paid, $1.65

"There is a message of cheer on every page, and the calendar is
beautifully illustrated."--Kansas City Star.




MISS BILLY (17th printing)

Cloth decorative, with a frontispiece in full color from a painting by G.
Tyng $1.50

"There is something altogether fascinating about 'Miss Billy,' some
inexplicable feminine characteristic that seems to demand the individual
attention of the reader from the moment we open the book until we
reluctantly turn the last page."--Boston Transcript.

MISS BILLY'S DECISION (10th printing)

Cloth decorative, with a frontispiece in full color from a painting by
Henry W. Moore.

Net, $1.25; carriage paid, $1.40

"The story is written in bright, clever style and has plenty of action and
humor. Miss Billy is nice to know and so are her friends."--New Haven
Times Leader.

"The author has succeeded admirably in repeating so delightful a character
and in making her the heroine of so many interesting and amusing
adventures."--The Springfield Union.

MISS BILLY--MARRIED (8th printing)

Cloth decorative, with a frontispiece in full color from a painting by W.
Haskell Coffin.

Net, $1.25; carriage paid, $1.40

"Although Pollyanna is the only copyrighted glad girl, Miss Billy is just
as glad as the younger figure and radiates just as much gladness. She
disseminates joy so naturally that we wonder why all girls are not like
her."--Boston Transcript.

"No one can come within the charmed circle of Miss Billy's radiant
personality without a vast increase of good cheer, of insistent optimism
and outgoing unselfishness. She is one of the vital characters that
vitalize everyone."--Christian Endeavor World.

CROSS CURRENTS

Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.00

"To one who enjoys a story of life as it is to-day, with its sorrows as
well as its triumphs, this volume is sure to appeal."--Book News Monthly.

THE TURN OF THE TIDE

Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.25

"A very beautiful book showing the influence that went to the developing
of the life of a dear little girl into a true and good woman."--Herald and
Presbyter, Cincinnati, Ohio.





End of Project Gutenberg's The House in the Water, by Charles G. D. Roberts

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE IN THE WATER ***

***** This file should be named 29839-8.txt or 29839-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/8/3/29839/

Produced by Roger Frank, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
