The Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph
[January, 1897], by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph [January, 1897]
       A Monthly Serial designed to Promote Knowledge of Bird-Life

Author: Various

Release Date: October 9, 2009 [EBook #30221]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS ILLUSTRATED [JANUARY 1897] ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, some
images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






    FROM: THE PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' ASSOCIATION.

                       _STATE OF NEW YORK_
               _Department of Public Instruction_
                    _SUPERINTENDENT'S OFFICE_

                                _Albany_ December 26, 1896.

  [Illustration: (seal)]
  _Stenographic Letter_
  Dictated by __________


  W. E. Watt, President &c.,
                   Fisher Building,
                       277 Dearborn St., Chicago, Ill.

  My dear Sir:

  Please accept my thanks for a copy of the first publication of "Birds."
  Please enter my name as a regular subscriber. It is one of the most
  beautiful and interesting publications yet attempted in this direction.
  It has other attractions in addition to its beauty, and it must win its
  way to popular favor.

  Wishing the handsome little magazine abundant prosperity,
  I remain

                   Yours very respectfully,
                   [signature]
                                State Superintendent.


       *       *       *       *       *




 Vol. 1. No. 1.    JANUARY, 1897.    PRICE 15 CENTS: $1.50 A YEAR.
 ONCE A MONTH.


 BIRDS

 ILLUSTRATED BY
 COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY

 [Illustration: NONPAREIL.]

 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY
 OFFICE: FISHER BUILDING
 CHICAGO




 BIRDS

 ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY

 A MONTHLY SERIAL
 DESIGNED TO PROMOTE
 KNOWLEDGE OF BIRD-LIFE


    "With cheerful hop from perch to spray,
       They sport along the meads;
     In social bliss together stray,
       Where love or fancy leads.

     Through spring's gay scenes each happy pair
       Their fluttering joys pursue;
     Its various charms and produce share,
       Forever kind and true."


 CHICAGO, U. S. A.
 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
 1896




PREFACE.

It has become a universal custom to obtain and preserve the likenesses
of one's friends. Photographs are the most popular form of these
likenesses, as they give the true exterior outlines and appearance,
(except coloring) of the subjects. But how much more popular and useful
does photography become, when it can be used as a means of securing
plates from which to print photographs in a regular printing press, and,
what is more astonishing and delightful, to produce the REAL COLORS of
nature as shown in the subject, no matter how brilliant or varied.

We quote from the December number of the Ladies' Home Journal: "_An
excellent_ suggestion was recently made by the Department of Agriculture
at Washington that the public schools of the country shall have a new
holiday, to be known as Bird Day. Three cities have already adopted the
suggestion, and it is likely that others will quickly follow. Of course,
Bird Day will differ from its successful predecessor, Arbor Day. We can
plant trees but not birds. It is suggested that Bird Day take the form
of bird exhibitions, of bird exercises, of bird studies--any form of
entertainment, in fact, which will bring children closer to their little
brethren of the air, and in more intelligent sympathy with their life
and ways. There is a wonderful story in bird life, and but few of our
children know it. Few of our elders do, for that matter. A whole day of
a year can well and profitably be given over to the birds. Than such
study, nothing can be more interesting. The cultivation of an intimate
acquaintanceship with our feathered friends is a source of genuine
pleasure. We are under greater obligations to the birds than we dream
of. Without them the world would be more barren than we imagine.
Consequently, we have some duties which we owe them. What these duties
are only a few of us know or have ever taken the trouble to find out.
Our children should not be allowed to grow to maturity without this
knowledge. The more they know of the birds the better men and women
they will be. We can hardly encourage such studies too much."

Of all animated nature, birds are the most beautiful in coloring, most
graceful in form and action, swiftest in motion and most perfect emblems
of freedom.

They are withal, very intelligent and have many remarkable traits,
so that their habits and characteristics make a delightful study
for all lovers of nature. In view of the facts, we feel that we are
doing a useful work for the young, and one that will be appreciated by
progressive parents, in placing within the easy possession of children
in the homes these beautiful photographs of birds.

The text is prepared with the view of giving the children as clear an
idea as possible, of haunts, habits, characteristics and such other
information as will lead them to love the birds and delight in their
study and acquaintance.

                                    NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING CO.
 Copyrighted, 1896.


       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: NONPAREIL.]

THE NONPAREIL.


I am called the Nonpareil because there is no other bird equal to me.

I have many names. Some call me the "Painted Finch" or "Painted
Bunting." Others call me "The Pope," because I wear a purple hood.

I live in a cage, eat seeds, and am very fond of flies and spiders.

Sometimes they let me out of the cage and I fly about the room and catch
flies. I like to catch them while they are flying.

When I am tired I stop and sing. There is a vase of flowers in front of
the mirror.

I fly to this vase where I can see myself in the glass. Then I sing as
loud as I can. They like to hear me sing.

I take a bath every day and how I do make the water fly!

I used to live in the woods where there were many birds like me. We
built our nests in bushes, hedges, and low trees. How happy we were.

My cage is pretty but I wish I could go back to my home in the woods.

See page 15.

    "Sweet warblers of the sunny hours,
       Forever on the wing,
     I love thee as I love the flowers,
       The sunlight and the spring.

     They come like pleasant memories
       In summer's joyous time,
     And sing their gushing melodies,
       As I would sing a rhyme.

     In the green and quiet places,
       Where the golden sunlight falls,
     We sit with smiling faces
       To list their silver calls.

     And when their holy anthems
       Come pealing through the air,
     Our hearts leap forth to meet them
       With a blessing and a prayer.

     Amid the morning's fragrant dew,
       Amid the mists of even,
     They warble on as if they drew
       Their music down from heaven.

     How sweetly sounds each mellow note
       Beneath the moon's pale ray,
     When dying zephyrs rise and float
       Like lovers' sighs away!"




THE RESPLENDENT TROGON.

A Letter to Little Boys and Girls of the United States.


Is it cold where you live, little boys and girls? It is not where I
live. Don't you think my feathers grew in the bright sunshine?

My home is way down where the big oceans almost meet. The sun is almost
straight overhead every noon.

I live in the woods, way back where the trees are tall and thick. I
don't fly around much, but sit on a limb of a tree way up high.

Don't you think my red breast looks pretty among the green leaves?

When I see a fly or a berry I dart down after it. My long tail streams
out behind like four ribbons. I wish you could see me. My tail never
gets in the way.

Wouldn't you like to have me sit on your shoulder, little boy? You see
my tail would reach almost to the ground.

If you went out into the street with me on your shoulder, I would call
_whe-oo_, _whe-oo_, the way I do in the woods.

All the little boys and girls playing near would look around and say,
"What is that noise?" Then they would see you and me and run up fast and
say, "Where did you get that bird?"

The little girls would want to pull out my tail feathers to put around
their hats. You would not let them, would you?

I have a mate. I think she is very nice. Her tail is not so long as
mine. Would you like to see her too? She lays eggs every year, and sits
on them till little birds hatch out. They are just like us, but they
have to grow and get dressed in the pretty feathers like ours. They look
like little dumplings when they come out of the eggs.

But they are all right. They get very hungry and we carry them lots of
things to eat, so they can grow fast.

    Your friend,
                 R. T.

[Illustration: RESPLENDENT TROGON.]




THE RESPLENDENT TROGON.


Resplendent Trogons are natives of Central America. There are fifty
kinds, and this is the largest. A systematic account of the superb tribe
has been given by Mr. Gould, the only naturalist who has made himself
fully acquainted with them.

Of all birds there are few which excite so much admiration as the
Resplendent Trogon.

The skin is so singularly thin that it has been not inaptly compared to
wet blotting paper, and the plumage has so light a hold upon the skin
that when the bird is shot the feathers are plentifully struck from
their sockets by its fall and the blows which it receives from the
branches as it comes to the ground.

Its eggs, of a pale bluish-green, were first procured by Mr. Robert
Owen. Its chief home is in the mountains near Coban in Vera Paz, but it
also inhabits forests in other parts of Guatemala at an elevation of
from 6,000 to 9,000 feet.

From Mr. Salvin's account of his shooting in Vera Paz we extract the
following hunting story:

"My companions are ahead and Filipe comes back to say that they have
heard a quesal (Resplendent Trogon). Of course, being anxious to watch
as well as to shoot one of these birds myself, I immediately hurry to
the spot. I have not to wait long. A distant clattering noise indicates
that the bird is on the wing. He settles--a splendid male--on the bough
of a tree not seventy yards from where we are hidden. It sits almost
motionless on its perch, the body remaining in the same position, the
head only moving from side to side. The tail does not hang quite
perpendicularly, the angle between the true tail and the vertical being
perhaps as much as fifteen or twenty degrees. The tail is occasionally
jerked open and closed again, and now and then slightly raised, causing
the long tail coverts to vibrate gracefully. I have not seen all. A ripe
fruit catches the quesal's eye and he darts from his perch, plucks the
berry, and returns to his former position. This is done with a degree of
elegance that defies description. A low whistle from Capriano calls the
bird near, and a moment afterward it is in my hand--the first quesal I
have seen and shot."

The above anecdote is very beautiful and graphic, but we read the last
sentence with pain. We wish to go on record with this our first number
as being unreconciled to the _ruthless_ killing of the birds. He who
said, not a sparrow "shall fall on the ground without your Father," did
not intend such birds to be killed, but to beautify the earth.

The cries of the quesal are various. They consist principally of a low
note, _whe-oo_, _whe-oo_, which the bird repeats, whistling it softly at
first, then gradually swelling it into a loud and not unmelodious cry.
This is often succeeded by a long note, which begins low and after
swelling dies away as it began. Other cries are harsh and discordant.
The flight of the Trogon is rapid and straight. The long tail feathers,
which never seem to be in the way, stream after him. The bird is never
found except in forests of the loftiest trees, the lower branches of
which, being high above the ground, seem to be its favorite resort. Its
food consists principally of fruit, but occasionally a caterpillar is
found in its stomach.




THE MANDARIN DUCK.

A Letter from China.


Quack! Quack! I got in just in time.

I came as fast as I could, as I was afraid of being whipped. You see I
live in a boat with a great many other ducks.

My master and his family live in the boat too. Isn't that a funny place
to live in?

We stay in all night. Waking up early in the morning, we cry Quack!
Quack! until we wake the master.

He gets up and opens the gate for us and out we tumble into the water.
We are in such a hurry that we fall over each other. We swim about
awhile and then we go to shore for breakfast.

There are wet places near the shore where we find worms, grubs, and
roots. When evening comes the master blows a whistle. Then we know it is
time to come home.

We start as soon as we hear it, and hurry, because the last duck in gets
a whipping. It does not hurt much but we do not like it, so we all try
to get home first.

I have web feet, but I perch like other birds on the branches of the
trees near the river.

My feathers are beautiful in the sunlight. My wife always sits near me.
Her dress is not like mine. It is brown and grey.

From May to August I lose my bright feathers, then I put on a dress like
my wife's.

My master's family are Chinese, and they are very queer. They would not
sell me for anything, as they would not like to have me leave China.

Sometimes a pair of us are put in a gay cage and carried to a wedding.
After the wedding we are given to the bride and groom.

I hear the master's whistle again. He wants me to come in and go to bed.
Quack! Quack! Good bye!

[Illustration: MANDARIN DUCK.]




THE MANDARIN DUCK.


"A more magnificently clothed bird," says Wood, "than the male Chinese
Mandarin Duck, can hardly be found, when in health and full nuptial
plumage. They are natives of China and Japan, and are held in such high
esteem by the Chinese that they can hardly be obtained at any price, the
natives having a singular dislike to seeing the birds pass into the
possession of Europeans."

Though web-footed, the birds have the power of perching and it is
a curious sight to watch them on the branches of trees overhanging
the pond in which they live, the male and female being always close
together, the one gorgeous in purple, green, white, and chestnut, and
the other soberly appareled in brown and grey. This handsome plumage
the male loses during four months of the year, from May to August, when
he throws off his fine crest, his wing-fans, and all his brilliant
colors, assuming the sober tinted dress of his mate. The Summer Duck of
America bears a close resemblance to the Mandarin Duck, both in plumage
and manners, and at certain times of the year is hardly to be
distinguished from that bird.

The foreign duck has been successfully reared in Zoological Gardens,
some being hatched under the parent bird and others under a domestic
hen, the latter hatching the eggs three days in advance of the former.

"The Chinese," says Dr. Bennett, "highly esteem the Mandarin Duck, which
exhibits, as they think, a most striking example of conjugal attachment
and fidelity. A pair of them are frequently placed in a gaily decorated
cage and carried in their marriage processions, to be presented to the
bride and groom as worthy objects of emulation."

"I could more easily," wrote a friend of Dr. Bennett's in China to whom
he had expressed his desire for a pair of these birds, "send you two
live Mandarins than a pair of Mandarin Ducks."

Concerning their attachment and fidelity to one another, Dr. Bennett
recites the following:

"Mr. Beale's aviary at Maceo one day was broken open and the male bird
stolen from the side of its mate. She refused to be comforted, and,
retiring to the farthest part of the aviary, sat disconsolate, rarely
partaking of food, and giving no attention to her soiled and rumpled
plumage. In vain did another handsome drake endeavor to console her for
her loss. After some time the stolen bird was found in the quarters of
a miserable Chinaman, and at once restored to its mate. As soon as he
recognized his abode he began to flap his wings and quack vehemently.
She heard his voice and almost quacked to screaming with ecstasy, both
expressing their joy by crossing necks and quacking in concert. The next
morning he fell upon the unfortunate drake who had made consolatory
advances to his mate, pecked out his eyes and so injured him that the
poor fellow died in the course of a few days."

According to Schrenck, this species appears in the countries watered by
the Amoor about May, and departs again at the end of August; at this
season it is always met with in small or large flocks, which are so
extremely shy that they rarely come within gunshot. Whilst on the wing
these parties crowd closely together in front, the birds in the rear
occupying a comparatively free space.




THE GOLDEN PHEASANT


They call me the Golden Pheasant, because I have a golden crest. It is
like a king's crown. Don't you think my dress is beautiful enough for a
king?

See the large ruff around my neck. I can raise and lower it as I please.

I am a very large bird. I am fourteen inches tall and twenty-eight
inches long. I can step right over your little robins and meadow larks
and blue jays and not touch them.

Sometimes people get some of our eggs and put them under an old hen. By
and by little pheasants hatch out, and the hen is very good to them. She
watches over them and feeds them, but they do not wish to stay with her;
they like their wild life. If they are not well fed they will fly away.

I have a wife. Her feathers are beginning to grow like mine. In a few
years she will look as I do. We like to have our nests by a fallen
tree.

       *       *       *

The well-known Chinese Pheasant, which we have named the Golden
Pheasant, as well as its more sober-colored cousin, the Silver Pheasant,
has its home in Eastern Asia.

China is pre-eminently the land of Pheasants; for, besides those just
mentioned, several other species of the same family are found there.
Japan comes next to China as a pheasant country and there are some in
India.

In China the Golden Pheasant is a great favorite, not only for its
splendid plumage and elegant form, but for the excellence of its flesh,
which is said to surpass even that of the common pheasant. It has been
introduced into Europe, but is fitted only for the aviary.

For purposes of the table it is not likely to come into general use, as
there are great difficulties in the way of breeding it in sufficient
numbers, and one feels a natural repugnance to the killing of so
beautiful a bird for the sake of eating it. The magnificent colors
belong only to the male, the female being reddish brown, spotted and
marked with a darker hue. The tail of the female is short. The statement
is made, however, that some hens kept for six years by Lady Essex
gradually assumed an attire like that of the males.

Fly-fishers highly esteem the crest and feathers on the back of the neck
of the male, as many of the artificial baits owe their chief beauty to
the Golden Pheasant.

According to Latham, it is called by the Chinese Keuki, or Keukee, a
word which means gold flower fowl.

       *       *       *

    "A merry welcome to thee, glittering bird!
       Lover of summer flowers and sunny things!
     A night hath passed since my young buds have heard
       The music of thy rainbow-colored wings--
     Wings that flash spangles out where'er they quiver,
       Like sunlight rushing o'er a river."

[Illustration: GOLDEN PHEASANT.]




THE NONPAREIL.


So full of fight is this little bird, that the bird trappers take
advantage of his disposition to make him a prisoner. They place a
decoy bird on a cage trap in the attitude of defense, and when it is
discovered by the bird an attack at once follows, and the fighter soon
finds himself caught.

They are a great favorite for the cage, being preferred by many to the
Canary. Whatever he may lack as a songster he more than makes up by his
wonderful beauty. These birds are very easily tamed, the female, even in
the wild state, being so gentle that she allows herself to be lifted
from the nest. They are also called the _Painted Finch_ or _Painted
Bunting_. They are found in our Southern States and Mexico. They are
very numerous in the State of Louisiana and especially about the City of
New Orleans, where they are greatly admired by the French inhabitants,
who, true to their native instincts, admire anything with gay colors. As
the first name indicates, he has no equal, perhaps, among the songsters
for beauty of dress. On account of this purple hood, he is called by the
French _Le Pape_, meaning The Pope.

The bird makes its appearance in the Southern States the last of April
and, during the breeding season, which lasts until July, two broods are
raised. The nests are made of fine grass and rest in the crotches of
twigs of the low bushes and hedges. The eggs have a dull or pearly-white
ground and are marked with blotches and dots of purplish and reddish
brown.

It is very pleasing to watch the numerous changes which the feathers
undergo before the male bird attains his full beauty of color. The young
birds of both sexes during the first season are of a fine olive green
color on the upper parts and a pale yellow below. The female undergoes
no material change in color except becoming darker as she grows older.
The male, on the contrary, is three seasons in obtaining his full
variety of colors. In the second season the blue begins to show on his
head and the red also makes its appearance in spots on the breast. The
third year he attains his full beauty.

Their favorite resorts are small thickets of low trees and bushes, and
when singing they select the highest branches of the bush. They are
passionately fond of flies and insects and also eat seeds and rice.

Thousands of these birds are trapped for the cage, and sold annually to
our northern people and also in Europe. They are comparatively cheap,
even in our northern bird markets, as most of them are exchanged for our
Canaries and imported birds that cannot be sent directly to the south on
account of climatic conditions.

Many a northern lady, while visiting the orange groves of Florida,
becomes enchanted with the Nonpareil in his wild state, and some shrewd
and wily negro, hearing her expressions of delight, easily procures one,
and disposes of it to her at an extravagant price.




THE AUSTRALIAN GRASS PARRAKEET.


I am a Parrakeet. I belong to the Parrot family. A man bought me and
brought me here.

It is not warm here, as it was where I came from. I almost froze coming
over here.

I am not kept in a cage. I stay in the house and go about as I please.

There is a Pussy Cat in the house. Sometimes I ride on her back. I like
that.

I used to live in the grass lands. It was very warm there. I ran among
the thick grass blades, and sat on the stems and ate seeds.

I had a wife then. Her feathers were almost like mine. We never made
nests. When we wanted a nest, we found a hole in a gum tree. I used to
sing to my wife while she sat on the nest.

I can mock other birds. Sometimes I warble and chirp at the same time.
Then it sounds like two birds singing. My tongue is short and thick, and
this helps me to talk. But I have been talking too much. My tongue is
getting tired.

I think I'll have a ride on Pussy's back. Good bye.

       *       *       *

Parrakeets have a great fondness for the grass lands, where they may be
seen in great numbers, running amid the thick grass blades, clinging to
their stems, or feeding on their seeds.

Grass seed is their constant food in their native country. In captivity
they take well to canary seed, and what is remarkable, never pick food
with their feet, as do other species of parrots, but always use their
beaks. "They do not build a nest, but must be given a piece of wood
with a rough hole in the middle, which they will fill to their liking,
rejecting all soft lining of wool or cotton that you may furnish them."

Only the male sings, warbling nearly all day long, pushing his beak at
times into his mate's ear as though to give her the full benefit of his
song. The lady, however, does not seem to appreciate his efforts, but
generally pecks him sharply in return.

A gentleman who brought a Parrakeet from Australia to England, says
it suffered greatly from the cold and change of climate and was kept
alive by a kind-hearted weather-beaten sailor, who kept it warm and
comfortable in his bosom. It was not kept in a cage, but roamed at will
about the room, enjoying greatly at times, a ride on the cat's back. At
meals he perched upon his master's shoulder, picking the bits he liked
from a plate set before him. If the weather was cold or chilly, he would
pull himself up by his master's whiskers and warm his feet by standing
on his bald head. He always announced his master's coming by a shrill
call, and no matter what the hour of night, never failed to utter a note
of welcome, although apparently asleep with his head tucked under his
wing.

[Illustration: AUSTRALIAN GRASS PARRAKEET.]




[Illustration: COCK-OF-THE-ROCK.]

THE COCK-OF-THE-ROCK.


The Cock-of-the-Rock lives in Guiana. Its nest is found among the
rocks. T. K. Salmon says: "I once went to see the breeding place of the
Cock-of-the-Rock; and a darker or wilder place I have never been in.
Following up a mountain stream the gorge became gradually more enclosed
and more rocky, till I arrived at the mouth of a cave with high rock on
each side, and overshadowed by high trees, into which the sun never
penetrated. All was wet and dark, and the only sound heard was the
rushing of the water over the rocks. We had hardly become accustomed to
the gloom when a nest was found, a dark bird stealing away from what
seemed to be a lump of mud upon the face of the rock. This was a nest
of the Cock-of-the-Rock, containing two eggs; it was built upon a
projecting piece, the body being made of mud or clay, then a few sticks,
and on the top lined with green moss. It was about five feet from the
water. I did not see the male bird, and, indeed, I have rarely ever seen
the male and female birds together, though I have seen both sexes in
separate flocks."

The eggs are described as pale buff with various sized spots of shades
from red-brown to pale lilac.

It is a solitary and wary bird, feeding before sunrise and after sunset
and hiding through the day in sombre ravines.

Robert Schomburgh describes its dance as follows:

"While traversing the mountains of Western Guiana we fell in with a
pack of these splendid birds, which gave me the opportunity of being
an eye witness of their dancing, an accomplishment which I had hitherto
regarded as a fable. We cautiously approached their ballet ground and
place of meeting, which lay some little distance from the road. The
stage, if we may so call it, measured from four to five feet in
diameter; every blade of grass had been removed and the ground was as
smooth as if leveled by human hands. On this space we saw one of the
birds dance and jump about, while the others evidently played the part
of admiring spectators. At one moment it expanded its wings, threw its
head in the air, or spread out its tail like a peacock scratching the
ground with its foot; all this took place with a sort of hopping gait,
until tired, when on emitting a peculiar note, its place was immediately
filled by another performer. In this manner the different birds went
through their terpsichorean exercises, each retiring to its place among
the spectators, who had settled on the low bushes near the theatre of
operations. We counted ten males and two females in the flock. The noise
of a breaking stick unfortunately raised an alarm, when the whole
company of dancers immediately flew off."

"The Indians, who place great value on their skins, eagerly seek out
their playing grounds, and armed with their blow-tubes and poisoned
arrows, lie in wait for the dances. The hunter does not attempt to use
his weapon until the company is quite engrossed in the performance, when
the birds become so preoccupied with their amusement that four or five
are often killed before the survivors detect the danger and decamp."




THE RED BIRD OF PARADISE.


My home is on an island where it is very warm. I fly among the tall
trees and eat fruit and insects.

See my beautiful feathers. The ladies like to wear them in their hats.

The feathers of my wife are brown, but she has no long tail feathers.

My wife thinks my plumes are very beautiful.

When we have a party, we go with our wives to a tall tree. We spread our
beautiful plumes while our wives sit and watch us.

Sometimes a man finds our tree and builds a hut among the lower
branches.

He hides in the hut and while we are spreading our feathers shoots at
us.

The arrows are not sharp. They do not draw blood.

When they dry the skins they take off the feet and wings. This is why
people used to think we had neither feet nor wings.

They also thought we lived on the dews of heaven and the honey of
flowers. This is why we are called the Birds of Paradise.

       *       *       *

    "Upon its waving feathers poised in air,
     Feathers, or rather clouds of golden down,
     With streamers thrown luxuriantly out
     In all the wantonness of winged wealth."

[Illustration: RED BIRD OF PARADISE.]




THE RED BIRD OF PARADISE.


Birds of Paradise are found only in New Guinea and on the neighboring
islands. The species presented here is found only on a few islands.

In former days very singular ideas prevailed concerning these birds
and the most extravagant tales were told of the life they led in their
native lands. The natives of New Guinea, in preparing their skins for
exportation, had removed all traces of legs, so that it was popularly
supposed they possessed none, and on account of their want of feet and
their great beauty, were called the Birds of Paradise, retaining, it was
thought, the forms they had borne in the Garden of Eden, living upon dew
or ether, through which it was imagined they perpetually floated by the
aid of their long cloud-like plumage.

Of one in confinement Dr. Bennett says: "I observed the bird, before
eating a grasshopper, place the insect upon the perch, keep it firmly
fixed by the claws, and, divesting it of the legs, wings, etc., devour
it with the head always first. It rarely alights upon the ground, and so
proud is the creature of its elegant dress that it never permits a soil
to remain upon it, frequently spreading out its wings and feathers,
regarding its splendid self in every direction."

The sounds uttered by this bird are very peculiar, resembling somewhat
the cawing of the Raven, but change gradually to a varied scale in
musical gradations, like _he, hi, ho, how_! He frequently raises his
voice, sending forth notes of such power as to be heard at a long
distance. These notes are _whack_, _whack_, uttered in a barking tone,
the last being a low note in conclusion.

While creeping amongst the branches in search of insects, he utters a
soft clucking note. During the entire day he flies incessantly from one
tree to another, perching but a few moments, and concealing himself
among the foliage at the least suspicion of danger.

In Bennett's "Wanderings" is an entertaining description of Mr. Beale's
bird at Maceo. "This elegant bird," he says, "has a light, playful, and
graceful manner, with an arch and impudent look, dances about when a
visitor approaches the cage, and seems delighted at being made an object
of admiration. It bathes twice daily, and after performing its ablutions
throws its delicate feathers up nearly over its head, the quills of
which have a peculiar structure, enabling the bird to effect this
object. To watch this bird make its toilet is one of the most
interesting sights of nature; the vanity which inspires its every
movement, the rapturous delight with which it views its enchanting
self, its arch look when demanding the spectator's admiration, are all
pardonable in a delicate creature so richly embellished, so neat and
cleanly, so fastidious in its tastes, so scrupulously exact in its
observances, and so winning in all its ways."

Says a traveler in New Guinea: "As we were drawing near a small grove of
teak-trees, our eyes were dazzled with a sight more beautiful than any I
had yet beheld. It was that of a Bird of Paradise moving through the
bright light of the morning sun. I now saw that the birds must be seen
alive in their native forests, in order to fully comprehend the poetic
beauty of the words Birds of Paradise. They seem the inhabitants of a
fairer world than ours, things that have wandered in some way from their
home, and found the earth to show us something of the beauty of worlds
beyond."




THE YELLOW THROATED TOUCAN.


I am a Toucan and I live in a very warm country.

See my handsome black coat and my yellow vest.

My toes are like a parrot's, two in front and two behind.

They help me to hold to the limbs.

Look at my large beak. It looks heavy but it is not, as it is filled
with air cells. These make it very light. Do you like my blue eyes?

My nest is very hard to find. If I tell you where it is, you will not
take the eggs, will you? It is in a hollow limb of a very high tree.

I am very fond of fruit, and for this reason the people on the
plantations do not like me very well.

I can fly very fast, but I cannot get along so well on the ground. I
keep my feet far apart and hop.

I like to sit in the top of the tallest trees. Then I am not afraid.
Nothing can reach me there but a rifle ball.

I do not like the owl, he is so ugly. When we find an owl we get in a
circle around him and snap our great beaks, and jerk our tails up and
down and scream. He is very much afraid of us.

The people where I live like our yellow breasts. They wear them on their
heads, and also put them on the ends of their bows.

We sometimes sit together in a tree and snap our beaks and shout. This
is why we have been called "Preacher Birds."

We can scream so loud that we may be heard a mile away. Our song is
"Tucano! Tucano!"

I think it is a pretty song, but the people do not like it very much.

[Illustration: YELLOW THROATED TOUCAN.]




THE YELLOW THROATED TOUCAN.


The Toucans are a numerous race of South American birds, at once
recognizable by the prodigious size of their beaks and by the richness
of their plumage. "These birds are very common," says Prince Von Wied,
"in all parts of the extensive forests of the Brazils and are killed
for the table in large numbers during the cool seasons. Their eggs are
deposited in the hollow limbs and holes of the colossal trees, so common
in the tropical forests, but their nests are very difficult to find. The
egg is said to be white. They are very fond of fruit, oranges, guavas
and plantains, and when these fruits are ripe make sad havoc among the
neighboring plantations. In return for these depredations the planter
eats their flesh, which is very delicate."

The flight of these birds is easy and graceful, sweeping with facility
over the loftiest trees of their native forests, their strangely
developed bills being no encumbrance to them, replete as they are with a
tissue of air-filled cells rendering them very light and even buoyant.

On the ground they get along with a rather awkward hopping movement,
their legs being kept widely apart. In ascending a tree they do not
climb but mount from one branch to another with a series of jumps,
ascending to the tops of the very loftiest trees, safe from every
missile except a rifle ball. They have a habit of sitting on the
branches in flocks, lifting their bills, clattering them together, and
shouting hoarsely all the while, from which custom the natives call them
Preacher-birds. Sometimes the whole party, including the sentinel, set
up a simultaneous yell so deafeningly loud that it can be heard a mile.
They are very loquacious birds and are often discovered through their
perpetual chattering. Their cry resembles the word "Tucano," which has
given origin to the peculiar name.

When settling itself to sleep, the Toucan packs itself up in a very
systematic manner, supporting its huge beak by resting it on its back,
and tucking it completely among the feathers, while it doubles its tail
across its back just as if it moved on hinges. So completely is the
large bill hidden among the feathers, that hardly a trace of it is
visible in spite of its great size and bright color, so that the bird
when sleeping looks like a great ball of loose feathers.

Sir R. Owen concludes that the large beak is of service in masticating
food compensating for the absence of any grinding structures in the
intestinal tract.

Says a naturalist: "We turned into a gloomy forest and for some time saw
nothing but a huge brown moth, which looked almost like a bat on the
wing. Suddenly we heard high upon the trees a short shrieking sort of
noise ending in a hiss, and our guide became excited and said, "Toucan!"
The birds were very wary and made off. They are much in quest and often
shot at. At last we caught sight of a pair, but they were at the top of
such a high tree that they were out of range. Presently, when I had
about lost hope, I heard loud calls, and three birds came and settled in
a low bush in the middle of the path. I shot one and it proved to be a
very large toucan. The bird was not quite dead when I picked it up, and
it bit me severely with its huge bill."




THE RED-RUMPED TANAGER.


I have just been singing my morning song, and I wish you could have
heard it. I think you would have liked it.

I always sing very early in the morning. I sing because I am happy, and
the people like to hear me.

My home is near a small stream, where there are low woods and underbrush
along its banks.

There is an old dead tree there, and just before the sun is up I fly to
this tree.

I sit on one of the branches and sing for about half an hour. Then I fly
away to get my breakfast.

I am very fond of fruit. Bananas grow where I live, and I like them best
of all.

I eat insects, and sometimes I fly to the rice fields and swing on the
stalks and eat rice.

The people say I do much harm to the rice, but I do not see why it is
wrong for me to eat it, for I think there is enough for all.

I must go now and get my breakfast. If you ever come to see me I will
sing to you.

I will show you my wife, too. She looks just like me. Be sure to get up
very early. If you do not, you will be too late for my song.

       *       *       *

    "Birds, Birds! ye are beautiful things,
     With your earth-treading feet and your cloud-cleaving wings.
     Where shall man wander, and where shall he dwell--
     Beautiful birds--that ye come not as well?
     Ye have nests on the mountain, all rugged and stark,
     Ye have nests in the forest, all tangled and dark;
     Ye build and ye brood 'neath the cottagers' eaves,
     And ye sleep on the sod, 'mid the bonnie green leaves;
     Ye hide in the heather, ye lurk in the brake,
     Ye dine in the sweet flags that shadow the lake;
     Ye skim where the stream parts the orchard decked land,
     Ye dance where the foam sweeps the desolate strand."

[Illustration: RED-RUMPED TANAGER.]




THE RED-RUMPED TANAGER.


An American family, the Tanagers are mostly birds of very brilliant
plumage. There are 300 species, a few being tropical birds. They are
found in British and French Guiana, living in the latter country in open
spots of dwellings and feeding on bananas and other fruits. They are
also said to do much harm in the rice fields.

In "The Auk," of July, 1893, Mr. George K. Cherrie, of the Field Museum,
says of the Red-Rumped Tanager:

"During my stay at Boruca and Palmar, (the last of February) the
breeding season was at its height, and I observed many of the Costa Rica
Red-Rumps nesting. In almost every instance where possible I collected
both parents of the nests, and in the majority of cases found the males
wearing the same dress as the females. In a few instances the male was
in mottled plumage, evidently just assuming the adult phase, and in a
lesser number of examples the male was in fully adult plumage--velvety
black and crimson red. From the above it is clear that the males begin
to breed before they attain fully adult plumage, and that they retain
the dress of the female until, at least, the beginning of the second
year.

"While on this trip I had many proofs that, in spite of its rich
plumage, and being a bird of the tropics, it is well worthy to hold a
place of honor among the song birds. And if the bird chooses an early
hour and a secluded spot for expressing its happiness, the melody is
none the less delightful. At the little village of Buenos Aires, on the
Rio Grande of Terraba, I heard the song more frequently than at any
other point. Close by the ranch house at which we were staying, there
is a small stream bordered by low woods and underbrush, that formed a
favorite resort for the birds. Just below the ranch is a convenient spot
where we took our morning bath. I was always there just as the day was
breaking. On the opposite bank was a small open space in the brush
occupied by the limbs of a dead tree. On one of these branches, and
always the same one, was the spot chosen by a Red-rump to pour forth his
morning song. Some mornings I found him busy with his music when I
arrived, and again he would be a few minutes behind me. Sometimes he
would come from one direction, sometimes from another, but he always
alighted at the same spot and then lost no time in commencing his song.
While singing, the body was swayed to and fro, much after the manner of
a canary while singing. The song would last for perhaps half an hour,
and then away the singer would go. I have not enough musical ability to
describe the song, but will say that often I remained standing quietly
for a long time, only that I might listen to the music."




THE GOLDEN ORIOLE.


We find the Golden Oriole in America only. According to Mr. Nuttall, it
is migratory, appearing in considerable numbers in West Florida about
the middle of March. It is a good songster, and in a state of captivity
imitates various tunes.

This beautiful bird feeds on fruits and insects, and its nest is
constructed of blades of grass, wool, hair, fine strings, and various
vegetable fibers, which are so curiously interwoven as to confine and
sustain each other. The nest is usually suspended from a forked and
slender branch, in shape like a deep basin and generally lined with fine
feathers.

"On arriving at their breeding locality they appear full of life and
activity, darting incessantly through the lofty branches of the tallest
trees, appearing and vanishing restlessly, flashing at intervals into
sight from amidst the tender waving foliage, and seem like living gems
intended to decorate the verdant garments of the fresh clad forest."

It is said these birds are so attached to their young that the female
has been taken and conveyed on her eggs, upon which with resolute and
fatal instinct she remained faithfully sitting until she expired.

An Indiana gentleman relates the following story:

"When I was a boy living in the hilly country of Southern Indiana, I
remember very vividly the nesting of a pair of fine Orioles. There stood
in the barn yard a large and tall sugar tree with limbs within six or
eight feet of the ground.

"At about thirty feet above the ground I discovered evidences of an
Oriole's nest. A few days later I noticed they had done considerably
more work, and that they were using horse hair, wool and fine strings.
This second visit seemed to create consternation in the minds of the
birds, who made a great deal of noise, apparently trying to frighten me
away. I went to the barn and got a bunch of horse hair and some wool,
and hung it on limbs near the nest. Then climbing up higher, I concealed
myself where I could watch the work. In less than five minutes they were
using the materials and chatted with evident pleasure over the abundant
supply at hand.

"They appeared to have some knowledge of spinning, as they would take a
horse hair and seemingly wrap it with wool before placing it in position
on the nest.

"I visited these birds almost daily, and shortly after the nest was
completed I noticed five little speckled eggs in it. The female was so
attached to the nest that I often rubbed her on the back and even lifted
her to look at the eggs."

[Illustration: GOLDEN ORIOLE.]




TESTIMONIALS.


                                   CHICAGO, December 10th, 1896.
 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY.

DEAR SIRS: I am very much pleased with this movement to give such
substantial and tangible aid to us on this subject, and for your kind
offer also.

                     Respectfully,
                                HARRIET N. WINCHELL,
                                        Principal Tilden School.


                             ST. JOSEPH, MICH., January 4, 1897.
 PRINCIPAL W. J. BLACK,
                  Chicago.

DEAR SIR: Thanks for sample copy of "Birds." It is by far the finest
thing I have ever seen in that line. I shall take great pleasure in
presenting it to my teachers, and shall be glad to be of any assistance
to you that I am able.

                         Yours,
                              GEORGE W. LOOMIS,
                                    Superintendent City Schools.


                                DES MOINES, IOWA, January 5, 1897.
 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
                Fisher Building, Chicago.

I have just seen the January number of "Birds," illustrated by color
photography; and think it instructive, delightful and beautiful.

                   Very sincerely,
                            MRS. MINNIE THERESA HATCH,
                                    Principal Washington School.


                             LUTHER, MICH., December 31st, 1896.
 W. E. WATT,
   Chicago, Ill.

DEAR SIR: Your serial on Birds received and after examination I have no
hesitation in saying that it is the best publication of the kind that I
have ever seen and I will do all that I can for you in presenting it to
my teachers and recommending it to their favorable notice.

                       Very truly,
                                  E. G. JOHNSON,
                                        Commissioner of Schools.




OUR PREMIUM

 A picture of wonderful beauty
 of the Golden Pheasant almost
 life size in a natural scene,
 plate 12×18 inches, on card
 19×25 inches, is given as a
 premium to yearly subscribers.
 Our price on this picture in
 Art Stores is $3.50.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph
[January, 1897], by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS ILLUSTRATED [JANUARY 1897] ***

***** This file should be named 30221-8.txt or 30221-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/2/2/30221/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, some
images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
