The Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds, Illustrated by Color Photography,
Vol. II, No 3, September 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Birds, Illustrated by Color Photography, Vol. II, No 3, September 1897 

Author: Various

Release Date: November 21, 2009 [EBook #30511]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS, ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, some
images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                       BIRDS.
         ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY
         ================================
         VOL. II.    SEPTEMBER      NO. 3
         ================================




BIRD SONG.

    How songs are made
    Is a mystery,
    Which studied for years
    Still baffles me.
            --R. H. STODDARD.


"Some birds are poets and sing all summer," says Thoreau. "They are the
true singers. Any man can write verses in the love season. We are most
interested in those birds that sing for the love of music, and not of
their mates; who meditate their strains and amuse themselves with
singing; the birds whose strains are of deeper sentiment."

Thoreau does not mention by name any of the poet-birds to which he
alludes, but we think our selections for the present month include some
of them. The most beautiful specimen of all, which is as rich in color
and "sun-sparkle" as the most polished gem to which he owes his name,
the Ruby-throated Humming Bird, cannot sing at all, uttering only a
shrill mouse-like squeak. The humming sound made by his wings is far
more agreeable than his voice, for "when the mild gold stars flower out"
it announces his presence. Then

    "A dim shape quivers about
    Some sweet rich heart of a rose."

He hovers over all the flowers that possess the peculiar sweetness that
he loves--the blossoms of the honeysuckle, the red, the white, and the
yellow roses, and the morning glory. The red clover is as sweet to him
as to the honey bee, and a pair of them may often be seen hovering over
the blossoms for a moment, and then disappearing with the quickness of
a flash of light, soon to return to the same spot and repeat the
performance. _Squeak, squeak!_ is probably their call note.

Something of the poet is the Yellow Warbler, though his song is not
quite as long as an epic. He repeats it a little too often, perhaps, but
there is such a pervading cheerfulness about it that we will not quarrel
with the author. _Sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet-sweeter-sweeter!_ is his
frequent contribution to the volume of nature, and all the while he is
darting about the trees, "carrying sun-glints on his back wherever he
goes." His song is appropriate to every season, but it is in the spring,
when we hear it first, that it is doubly welcome to the ear. The
grateful heart asks with Bourdillon:

    "What tidings hath the Warbler heard
    That bids him leave the lands of summer
    For woods and fields where April yields
    Bleak welcome to the blithe newcomer?"

The Mourning Dove may be called the poet of melancholy, for its song
is, to us, without one element of cheerfulness. Hopeless despair is in
every note, and, as the bird undoubtedly does have cheerful moods, as
indicated by its actions, its song must be appreciated only by its
mate. _Coo-o, coo-o!_ suddenly thrown upon the air and resounding near
and far is something hardly to be extolled, we should think, and yet the
beautiful and graceful Dove possesses so many pretty ways that every one
is attracted to it, and the tender affection of the mated pair is so
manifest, and their constancy so conspicuous, that the name has become
a symbol of domestic concord.

The Cuckoo must utter his note in order to be recognized, for few
that are learned in bird lore can discriminate him save from his
notes. He proclaims himself by calling forth his own name, so that it
is impossible to make a mistake about him. Well, his note is an agreeable
one and has made him famous. As he loses his song in the summer months,
he is inclined to make good use of it when he finds it again. English
boys are so skillful in imitating the Cuckoo's song, which they do to an
exasperating extent, that the bird himself may often wish for that of
the Nightingale, which is inimitable.

But the Cuckoo's song, monotonous as it is, is decidedly to be preferred
to that of the female House Wren, with its _Chit-chit-chit-chit_, when
suspicious or in anger. The male, however, is a real poet, let us
say--and sings a merry roulade, sudden, abruptly ended, and frequently
repeated. He sings, apparently, for the love of music, and is as merry
and gay when his mate is absent as when she is at his side, proving that
his singing is not solely for her benefit.

So good an authority as Dr. Coues vouches for the exquisite vocalization
of the Ruby-crowned Kinglet. Have you ever heard a wire vibrating? Such
is the call note of the Ruby, thin and metallic. But his song has a
fullness, a variety, and a melody, which, being often heard in the
spring migration, make this feathered beauty additionally attractive.
Many of the fine songsters are not brilliantly attired, but this fellow
has a combination of attractions to commend him as worthy of the bird
student's careful attention.

Of the Hermit Thrush, whose song is celebrated, we will say only, "Read
everything you can find about him." He will not be discovered easily,
for even Olive Thorne Miller, who is presumed to know all about birds,
tells of her pursuit of the Hermit in northern New York, where it was
said to be abundant, and finding, when she looked for him, that he had
always "been there" and was gone. But one day in August she saw the bird
and heard the song and exclaimed: "This only was lacking--this crowns my
summer."

The Song Sparrow can sing too, and the Phoebe, beloved of man, and the
White-breasted Nuthatch, a little. They do not require the long-seeking
of the Hermit Thrush, whose very name implies that he prefers to flock
by himself, but can be seen in our parks throughout the season. But the
Sparrow loves the companionship of man, and has often been a solace to
him. It is stated by the biographer of Kant, the great metaphysician,
that at the age of eighty he had become indifferent to much that was
passing around him in which he had formerly taken great interest. The
flowers showed their beautious hues to him in vain; his weary vision
gave little heed to their loveliness; their perfume came unheeded to
the sense which before had inhaled it with eagerness. The coming on of
spring, which he had been accustomed to hail with delight, now gave him
no joy save that it brought back a little Sparrow, which came annually
and made its home in a tree that stood by his window. Year after year,
as one generation went the way of all the earth, another would return to
its birth-place to reward the tender care of their benefactor by singing
to him their pleasant songs. And he longed for their return in the
spring with "an eagerness and intensity of expectation."

How many provisions nature has for keeping us simple-hearted and
child-like! The Song Sparrow is one of them.

                                     --C. C. MARBLE.




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                SUMMER YELLOW-BIRD.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]

THE YELLOW WARBLER.


In a recent article Angus Gaines describes so delightfully some of the
characteristics of the Yellow Warbler, or Summer Yellow-bird, sometimes
called the Wild Canary, that we are tempted to make use of part of it.
"Back and forth across the garden the little yellow birds were flitting,
dodging through currant and gooseberry bushes, hiding in the lilacs,
swaying for an instant on swinging sprays of grape vines, and then
flashing out across the garden beds like yellow sunbeams. They were
lithe, slender, dainty little creatures, and were so quick in their
movements that I could not recognize them at first, but when one of them
hopped down before me, lifted a fallen leaf and dragged a cutworm from
beneath it, and, turning his head, gave me a sidewise glance with his
victim still struggling in his beak, I knew him. His gay coat was yellow
without the black cap, wings, and tail which show in such marked
contrast to the bright canary hue of that other yellow bird, the
Gold-finch.

"Small and delicate as these birds are, they had been on a long journey
to the southward to spend the winter, and now on the first of May, they
had returned to their old home to find the land at its fairest--all
blossoms, buds, balmy air, sunshine, and melody. As they flitted about
in their restless way, they sang the soft, low, warbling trills, which
gave them their name of Yellow Warbler."

Mrs. Wright says these beautiful birds come like whirling leaves, half
autumn yellow, half green of spring, the colors blending as in the outer
petals of grass-grown daffodils. "Lovable, cheerful little spirits,
darting about the trees, exclaiming at each morsel that they glean.
Carrying sun glints on their backs wherever they go, they should make
the gloomiest misanthrope feel the season's charm. They are so sociable
and confiding, feeling as much at home in the trees by the house as in
seclusion."

The Yellow-bird builds in bushes, and the nest is a wonderful example of
bird architecture. Milkweed, lint and its strips of fine bark are glued
to twigs, and form the exterior of the nest. Its inner lining is made of
the silky down on dandelion-balls woven together with horse-hair. In
this dainty nest are laid four or five creamy white eggs, speckled with
lilac tints and red-browns. The unwelcome egg of the Cow-bird is often
found in the Yellow-bird's nest, but this Warbler builds a floor over
the egg, repeating the expedient, if the Cow-bird continues her
mischief, until sometimes a third story is erected.

A pair of Summer Yellow-birds, we are told, had built their nest in
a wild rose bush, and were rearing their family in a wilderness of
fragrant blossoms whose tinted petals dropped upon the dainty nest, or
settled upon the back of the brooding mother. The birds, however, did
not stay "to have their pictures taken," but their nest may be seen
among the roses.

The Yellow Warbler's song is

     _Sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet-sweeter-sweeter_:

seven times repeated.




THE HERMIT THRUSH.


In John Burroughs' "Birds and Poets" this master singer is described
as the most melodious of our songsters, with the exception of the Wood
Thrush, a bird whose strains, more than any other's, express harmony and
serenity, and he complains that no merited poetic monument has yet been
reared to it. But there can be no good reason for complaining of the
absence of appreciative prose concerning the Hermit. One writer says:
"How pleasantly his notes greet the ear amid the shrieking of the wind
and the driving snow, or when in a calm and lucid interval of genial
weather we hear him sing, if possible, more richly than before. His
song reminds us of a coming season when the now dreary landscape will be
clothed in a blooming garb befitting the vernal year--of the song of the
Blackbird and Lark, and hosts of other tuneful throats which usher in
that lovely season. Should you disturb him when singing he usually drops
down and awaits your departure, though sometimes he merely retires to a
neighboring tree and warbles as sweetly as before."

In "Birdcraft" Mrs. Wright tells us, better than any one else, the story
of the Hermit. She says: "This spring, the first week in May, when
standing at the window about six o'clock in the morning, I heard an
unusual note, and listened, thinking it at first a Wood Thrush and then
a Thrasher, but soon finding that it was neither of these I opened the
window softly and looked among the near by shrubs, with my glass. The
wonderful melody ascended gradually in the scale as it progressed, now
trilling, now legato, the most perfect, exalted, unrestrained, yet
withal, finished bird song that I ever heard. At the first note I caught
sight of the singer perching among the lower sprays of a dogwood tree.
I could see him perfectly: it was the Hermit Thrush. In a moment he
began again. I have never heard the Nightingale, but those who have say
that it is the surroundings and its continuous night singing that make
it even the equal of our Hermit; for, while the Nightingales sing in
numbers in the moonlit groves, the Hermit tunes his lute sometimes in
inaccessible solitudes, and there is something immaterial and immortal
about the song."

The Hermit Thrush is comparatively common in the northeast, and in
Pennsylvania it is, with the exception of the Robin, the commonest of
the Thrushes. In the eastern, as in many of the middle states, it is
only a migrant. It is usually regarded as a shy bird. It is a species of
more general distribution than any of the small Thrushes, being found
entirely across the continent and north to the Arctic regions. It is
not quite the same bird, however, in all parts of its range, the Rocky
Mountain region being occupied by a larger, grayer race, while on the
Pacific coast a dwarf race takes its place. It is known in parts of New
England as the "Ground Swamp Robin," and in other localities as "Swamp
Angel."

True lovers of nature find a certain spiritual satisfaction in the song
of this bird. "In the evening twilight of a June day," says one of
these, "when all nature seemed resting in quiet, the liquid, melting,
lingering notes of the solitary bird would steal out upon the air and
move us strangely. What was the feeling it awoke in our hearts? Was
it sorrow or joy, fear or hope, memory or expectation? And while we
listened, we thought the meaning of it all was coming; it was trembling
on the air, and in an instant it would reach us. Then it faded, it was
gone, and we could not even remember what it had been."




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                HERMIT THRUSH.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]

THE HERMIT THRUSH.


I am sorry, children, that I cannot give you a specimen of my song as an
introduction to the short story of my life. One writer about my family
says it is like this: "O spheral, spheral! O holy, holy! O clear away,
clear away! O clear up, clear up!" as if I were talking to the weather.
May be my notes do sound something like that, but I prefer you should
hear me sing when I am alone in the woods, and other birds are silent.
It is ever being said of me that I am as fine a singer as the English
Nightingale. I wish I could hear this rival of mine, and while I have
no doubt his voice is a sweet one, and I am not too vain of my own, I
should like to "compare notes" with him. Why do not some of you children
ask your parents to invite a few pairs of Nightingales to come and
settle here? They would like our climate, and would, I am sure, be
welcomed by all the birds with a warmth not accorded the English
Sparrow, who has taken possession and, in spite of my love for secret
hiding places, will not let even me alone.

When you are older, children, you can read all about me in another part
of BIRDS. I will merely tell you here that I live with you only from May
to October, coming and going away in company with the other Thrushes,
though I keep pretty well to myself while here, and while building my
nest and bringing up my little ones I hide myself from the face of man,
although I do not fear his presence. That is why I am called the Hermit.

If you wish to know in what way I am unlike my cousin Thrushes in
appearance, turn to pages 84 and 182, Vol. 1, of BIRDS. There you will
see their pictures. I am one of the smallest of the family, too. Some
call me "the brown bird with the rusty tail," and other names have been
fitted to me, as Ground Gleaner, Tree Trapper, and Seed Sower. But I do
not like nicknames, and am just plain,

                                       HERMIT THRUSH.




THE SONG SPARROW.

    Glimmers gay the leafless thicket
    Close beside my garden gate,
    Where, so light, from post to wicket,
    Hops the Sparrow, blithe, sedate;
    Who, with meekly folded wing,
    Comes to sun himself and sing.

    It was there, perhaps, last year,
    That his little house he built;
    For he seemed to perk and peer
    And to twitter, too, and tilt
    The bare branches in between,
    With a fond, familiar mien.
                --GEORGE PARSONS LATHROP.


We do not think it at all amiss to say that this darling among song
birds can be heard singing nearly everywhere the whole year round,
although he is supposed to come in March and leave us in November. We
have heard him in February, when his little feet made tracks in the
newly fallen snow, singing as cheerily as in April, May, and June, when
he is supposed to be in ecstacy. Even in August, when the heat of the
dog-days and his moulting time drive him to leafy seclusion, his liquid
notes may be listened for with certainty, while "all through October
they sound clearly above the rustling leaves, and some morning he comes
to the dogwood by the arbor and announces the first frost in a song that
is more direct than that in which he told of spring. While the chestnuts
fall from their velvet nests, he is singing in the hedge; but when the
brush heaps burn away to fragrant smoke in November, they veil his song
a little, but it still continues."

While the Song Sparrow nests in the extreme northern part of Illinois,
it is known in the more southern portions only as a winter resident.
This is somewhat remarkable, it is thought, since along the Atlantic
coast it is one of the most abundant summer residents throughout
Maryland and Virginia, in the same latitudes as southern Illinois, where
it is a winter sojourner, abundant, but very retiring, inhabiting almost
solely the bushy swamps in the bottom lands, and unknown as a song bird.
This is regarded as a remarkable instance of variation in habits with
locality, since in the Atlantic states it breeds abundantly, and is
besides one of the most familiar of the native birds.

The location of the Song Sparrow's nest is variable; sometimes on the
ground, or in a low bush, but usually in as secluded a place as its
instinct of preservation enables it to find. A favorite spot is a deep
shaded ravine through which a rivulet ripples, where the solitude is
disturbed only by the notes of his song, made more sweet and clear by
the prevailing silence.




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                SONG SPARROW.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]

THE SONG SPARROW.


DEAR YOUNG READERS:

I fancy many of the little folks who are readers of BIRDS are among my
acquaintances. Though I have never spoken to you, I have seen your eyes
brighten when my limpid little song has been borne to you by a passing
breeze which made known my presence. Once I saw a pale, worn face turn
to look at me from a window, a smile of pleasure lighting it up. And I
too was pleased to think that I had given some one a moment's happiness.
I have seen bird lovers (for we have lovers, and many of them) pause on
the highway and listen to my pretty notes, which I know as well as any
one have a cheerful and patient sound, and which all the world likes,
for to be cheered and encouraged along the pathway of life is like a
pleasant medicine to my weary and discouraged fellow citizens. For you
must know I am a citizen, as my friend Dr. Coues calls me, and all my
relatives. He and Mrs. Mabel Osgood Wright have written a book about
us called "Citizen Bird," and in it they have supported us in all our
rights, which even you children are beginning to admit we have. You are
kinder to us than you used to be. Some of you come quickly to our rescue
from untaught and thoughtless boys who, we think, if they were made to
know how sensitive we are to suffering and wrong, would turn to be our
friends and protectors instead. One dear boy I remember well (and he is
considered a hero by the Song Sparrows) saved a nest of our birdies from
a cruel school boy robber. Why should not all strong boys become our
champions? Many of them have great, honest, sympathetic hearts in their
bosoms, and, if we can only enlist them in our favor, they can give us a
peace and protection which for years we have been sighing. Yes, sighing,
because our hearts, though little, are none the less susceptible to all
the asperities--the terrible asperities of human nature. Papa will tell
you what I mean: you would not understand bird language.

Did you ever see my nest? I build it near the ground, and sometimes,
when kind friends prepare a little box for me, I occupy it. My song is
quite varied, but you will always recognize me by my call note, _Chek!
Chek! Chek!_ Some people say they hear me repeat "Maids, maids, maids,
hang on your teakettle," but I think this is only fancy, for I can sing
a real song, admired, I am sure, by all who love

                                                 SONG SPARROW.




THE CUCKOO.


Our first introduction to the Cuckoo was by means of the apparition
which issued hourly from a little German clock, such as are frequently
found in country inns. This particular clock had but one dial hand, and
the exact time of day could not be determined by it until the appearance
of the Cuckoo, who, in a squeaking voice, seemed to announce that it was
just one hour later or earlier, as the case might be, than at his last
appearance. We were puzzled, and remember fancying that a sun dial,
in clear weather, would be far more satisfactory as a time piece.
"Coo-coo," the image repeated, and then retired until the hour hand
should summon him once more.

To very few people, not students of birds, is the Cuckoo really known.
Its evanescent voice is often recognized, but being a solitary wanderer
even ornithologists have yet to learn much of its life history. In their
habits the American and European Cuckoos are so similar that whatever of
poetry and sentiment has been written of them is applicable alike to
either. A delightful account of the species may be found in Dixon's Bird
Life, a book of refreshing and original observation.

"The Cuckoo is found in the verdant woods, in the coppice, and even on
the lonely moors. He flits from one stunted tree to another and utters
his notes in company with the wild song of the Ring Ousel and the harsh
calls of the Grouse and Plover. Though his notes are monotonous, still
no one gives them this appellation. No! this little wanderer is held too
dear by us all as the harbinger of spring for aught but praise to be
bestowed on his mellow notes, which, though full and soft, are powerful,
and may on a calm morning, before the everyday hum of human toil begins,
be heard a mile away, over wood, field, and lake. Toward the summer
solstice his notes are on the wane, and when he gives them forth we
often hear him utter them as if laboring under great difficulty, and
resembling the syllables, "_Coo-coo-coo-coo_"."

On one occasion Dixon says he heard a Cuckoo calling in treble notes,
_Cuck oo-oo, cuck-oo-oo_, inexpressibly soft and beautiful, notably the
latter one. He at first supposed an echo was the cause of these strange
notes, the bird being then half a mile away, but he satisfied himself
that this was not the case, as the bird came and alighted on a noble oak
a few yards from him and repeated the notes. The Cuckoo utters his notes
as he flies, but only, as a rule, when a few yards from the place on
which he intends alighting.

The opinion is held by some observers that Nature has not intended the
Cuckoo to build a nest, but influences it to lay its eggs in the nests
of other birds, and intrust its young to the care of those species best
adapted to bring them to maturity. But the American species does build
a nest, and rears its young, though Audubon gives it a bad character,
saying: "It robs smaller birds of their eggs." It does not deserve the
censure it has received, however, and it is useful in many ways. Its
hatred of the worm is intense, destroying many more than it can eat. So
thoroughly does it do its work, that orchards, which three years ago,
were almost leafless, the trunks even being covered by slippery webbing,
are again yielding a good crop.

In September and October the Cuckoo is silent and suddenly disappears.
"He seldom sees the lovely tints of autumn, and never hears the wintry
storm-winds' voice, for, impelled by a resistless impulse, he wings his
way afar over mountain, stream, and sea, to a land where northern blasts
are not felt, and where a summer sun is shining in a cloudless sky."

 [Illustration: From col. O. E. Pagin.
                YELLOW-BILLED CUCKOO.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897 Chicago.]




THE RUBY-THROATED HUMMING BIRD.

    Is it a gem, half bird,
    Or is it a bird, half gem?
                    --EDGAR FAWCETT.


Of all animated beings this is the most elegant in form and the most
brilliant in colors, says the great naturalist Buffon. The stones and
metals polished by our arts are not comparable to this jewel of Nature.
She has it least in size of the order of birds, _maxime miranda in
minimis_. Her masterpiece is the Humming bird, and upon it she has
heaped all the gifts which the other birds may only share. Lightness,
rapidity, nimbleness, grace, and rich apparel all belong to this little
favorite. The emerald, the ruby, and the topaz gleam upon its dress. It
never soils them with the dust of earth, and its aerial life scarcely
touches the turf an instant. Always in the air, flying from flower to
flower, it has their freshness as well as their brightness. It lives
upon their nectar, and dwells only in the climates where they
perennially bloom.

All kinds of Humming birds are found in the hottest countries of the New
World. They are quite numerous and seem to be confined between the two
tropics, for those which penetrate the temperate zones in summer stay
there only a short time. They seem to follow the sun in its advance and
retreat; and to fly on the zephyr wing after an eternal spring.

The smaller species of the Humming birds are less in size than the great
fly wasp, and more slender than the drone. Their beak is a fine needle
and their tongue a slender thread. Their little black eyes are like two
shining points, and the feathers of their wings so delicate that they
seem transparent. Their short feet, which they use very little, are so
tiny one can scarcely see them. They rarely alight during the day. They
have a swift continual humming flight. The movement of their wings is
so rapid that when pausing in the air, the bird seems quite motionless.
One sees him stop before a blossom, then dart like a flash to another,
visiting all, plunging his tongue into their hearts, flattening them
with his wings, never settling anywhere, but neglecting none. He hastens
his inconstancies only to pursue his loves more eagerly and to multiply
his innocent joys. For this light lover of flowers lives at their
expense without ever blighting them. He only pumps their honey, and
for this alone his tongue seems designed.

The vivacity of these small birds is only equaled by their courage, or
rather their audacity. Sometimes they may be seen furiously chasing
birds twenty times their size, fastening upon their bodies, letting
themselves be carried along in their flight, while they peck fiercely
until their tiny rage is satisfied. Sometimes they fight each other
vigorously. Impatience seems their very essence. If they approach a
blossom and find it faded, they mark their spite by a hasty rending of
the petals. Their only voice is a weak cry of _Screp, screp_, frequent
and repeated, which they utter in the woods from dawn until at the first
rays of the sun they all take flight and scatter over the country.

The Ruby-throat is the only native Humming bird of eastern North
America, where it is a common summer resident from May to October,
breeding from Florida to Labrador. The nest is a circle an inch and a
half in diameter, made of fern wood, plant down, and so forth, shingled
with lichens to match the color of the branch on which it rests. Its
only note is a shrill, mouse-like squeak.




THE HOUSE WREN.


All the children, it seems to me, are familiar with the habits of Johnny
and Jenny Wren; and many of them, especially such as have had some
experience with country life, could themselves tell a story of these
mites of birds. Mr. F. Saunders tells one: "Perhaps you may think the
Wren is so small a bird he cannot sing much of a song, but he can. The
way we first began to notice him was by seeing our pet cat jumping about
the yard, dodging first one way and then another, then darting up a
tree; looking surprised, and disappointingly jumping down again.

"Pussy had found a new play-mate, for the little Wren evidently thought
it great fun to fly down just in front of her and dart away before she
could reach him, leading her from one spot to another, hovering above
her head, chattering to her all the time, and at last flying up far out
of her reach. This he repeated day after day, for some time, seeming to
enjoy the fun of disappointing her so nicely and easily. But after a
while the little fellow thought he would like a play-mate nearer his own
size, and went off to find one. But he came back all alone, and perched
himself on the very tip-top of a lightning-rod on a high barn at the
back of the yard; and there he would sing his sweet little trilling
song, hour after hour, hardly stopping long enough to find food for his
meals. We wondered that he did not grow tired of it. For about a week we
watched him closely, and one day I came running into the house to tell
the rest of the family with surprise and delight that our little Wren
knew what he was about, for with his winning song he had called a mate
to him. He led her to the tree where he had played with pussy, and they
began building a nest; but pussy watched then as well as we, and meant
to have her revenge upon him yet, so she sprang into the tree, tore the
nest to pieces, and tried to catch Jenny. The birds rebuilt their nest
three times, and finally we came to their rescue and placed a box in a
safe place under the eaves of the house, and Mr. Wren with his keen,
shrewd eyes, soon saw and appropriated it. There they stayed and raised
a pretty family of birdies; and I hope he taught them, as he did me, a
lesson in perseverance I'll never forget."




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                RUBY-THROATED HUMMING BIRDS.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                HOUSE WREN.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]




THE RUBY-THROATED HUMMING BIRD.


DEAR YOUNG FOLKS:

I fancy you think I cannot stop long enough to tell you a story, even
about myself. It is true, I am always busy with the flowers, drinking
their honey with my long bill, as you must be busy with your books, if
you would learn what they teach. I always select for my food the
sweetest flowers that grow in the garden.

Do you think you would be vain if you had my beautiful colors to wear?
Of course, you would not, but so many of my brothers and sisters have
been destroyed to adorn the bonnets and headdresses of the thoughtless
that the children cannot be too early taught to love us too well to do
us harm. Have you ever seen a ruby? It is one of the most valued of
gems. It is the color of my throat, and from its rare and brilliant
beauty I get a part of my name. The ruby is worn by great ladies and,
with the emerald and topaz, whose bright colors I also wear, is much
esteemed as an ornament.

If you will come into the garden in the late afternoon, between six
and seven o'clock, when I am taking my supper, and when the sun is
beginning to close his great eye, you will see his rays shoot sidewise
and show all the splendor of my plumage. You will see me, too, if your
eyes are sharp enough, draw up my tiny claws, pause in front of a rose,
and remain seemingly motionless. But listen, and you will hear the
reason for my name--a tense humming sound. Some call me a Hummer indeed.

I spend only half the year in the garden, coming in May and saying
farewell in October. After my mate and I are gone you may find our nest.
But your eyes will be sharp indeed if they detect it when the leaves are
on the trees, it is so small and blends with the branches. We use
fern-wool and soft down to build it, and shingle it with lichens to
match the branch it nests upon. You should see the tiny eggs of pure
white. But we, our nest and our eggs, are so dainty and delicate that
they should never be touched. We are only to be looked at and admired.

Farewell. Look for me when you go a-Maying.

                                            RUBY.




THE HOUSE WREN.

    "It was a merry time
      When Jenny Wren was young,
    When prettily she looked,
      And sweetly, too, she sung."


"In looking over an old memorandum book the other day," says Col. S. T.
Walker, of Florida, "I came across the following notes concerning the
nesting of the House Wren. I was sick at the time, and watched the whole
proceeding, from the laying of the first stick to the conclusion. The
nest was placed in one of the pigeonholes of my desk, and the birds
effected an entrance to the room through sundry cracks in the log cabin."

 Nest begun                         April 15th.
 Nest completed and first egg laid  April 27th.
 Last egg laid                         May 3rd.
 Began sitting                         May 4th.
 Hatching completed                   May 18th.
 Young began to fly                   May 27th.
 Young left the nest                  June 1st.
 Total time occupied                   47 days.

Such is the usual time required for bringing forth a brood of this
species of Wren, which is the best known of the family. In the
Atlantic states it is more numerous than in the far west, where
wooded localities are its chosen haunts, and where it is equally at
home in the cottonwoods of the river valleys, and on the aspens just
below the timber line on lofty mountains.

Mrs. Osgood Wright says very quaintly that the House Wren is a bird
who has allowed the word _male_ to be obliterated from its _social_
constitution at least: that we always speak of Jenny Wren: always refer
to the Wren as _she_ as we do of a ship. That it is Johnny Wren who
sings and disports himself generally, but it is Jenny, who, by dint of
much scolding and fussing, keeps herself well to the front. She chooses
the building-site and settles all the little domestic details. If Johnny
does not like her choice, he may go away and stay away; she will remain
where she has taken up her abode and make a second matrimonial venture.

The House Wren's song is a merry one, sudden, abruptly ended, and
frequently repeated. It is heard from the middle of April to October,
and upon the bird's arrival it at once sets about preparing its nest, a
loose heap of sticks with a soft lining, in holes, boxes, and the like.
From six to ten tiny, cream-colored eggs are laid, so thickly spotted
with brown that the whole egg is tinged.

The House Wren is not only one of our most interesting and familiar
neighbors, but it is useful as an exterminator of insects, upon which it
feeds. Frequently it seizes small butterflies when on the wing. We have
in mind a sick child whose convalescence was hastened and cheered by the
near-by presence of the merry House Wren, which sings its sweet little
trilling song, hour after hour, hardly stopping long enough to find food
for its meals.




 [Illustration: From col. J. G. Parker. Jr.
                PHOEBE.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]

THE PHOEBE.

    Oft the Phoebe's cheery notes
    Wake the laboring swain;
    "Come, come!" say the merry throats,
    "Morn is here again."
    Phoebe, Phoebe! let them sing for aye,
    Calling him to labor at the break of day.
                                      --C. C. M.


Nearly everywhere in the United States we find this cheerful bird, known
as Pewee, Barn Pewee, Bridge Pewee, or Phoebe, or Pewit Flycatcher. "It
is one of that charming coterie of the feathered tribe who cheer the
abode of man with their presence." There are few farmyards without a
pair of Pewees, who do the farmer much service by lessening the number
of flies about the barn, and by calling him to his work in the morning
by their cheery notes.

Dr. Brewer says that this species is attracted both to the vicinity of
water and to the neighborhood of dwellings, probably for the same
reason--the abundance of insects in either situation. They are a
familiar, confiding, and gentle bird, attached to localities, and
returning to them year after year. Their nests are found in sheltered
situations, as under a bridge, a projecting rock, in the porches of
houses, etc. They have been known to build on a small shelf in the porch
of a dwelling, against the wall of a railroad station, within reach of
the passengers, and under a projecting window-sill, in full view of the
family, entirely unmoved by the presence of the latter at meal time.

Like all the flycatcher family the Phoebe takes its food mostly flying.
Mrs. Wright says that the Pewee in his primitive state haunts dim woods
and running water, and that when domesticated he is a great bather, and
may be seen in the half-light dashing in and out of the water as he
makes trips to and from the nest. After the young are hatched both old
and young disport themselves about the water until moulting time. She
advises: "Do not let the Phoebes build under the hoods of your windows,
for their spongy nests harbor innumerable bird-lice, and under such
circumstances your fly-screens will become infested and the house
invaded."

In its native woods the nest is of moss, mud, and grass placed on a
rock, near and over running water; but in the vicinity of settlements
and villages it is built on a horizontal bridge beam, or on timber
supporting a porch or shed. The eggs are pure white, somewhat spotted.
The notes, to some ears, are _Phoebe, phoebe, pewit, phoebe!_ to others,
of somewhat duller sense of hearing, perhaps, _Pewee, pewee, pewee!_ We
confess to a fancy that the latter is the better imitation.




THE RUBY-CROWNED KINGLET.


Baskett says that the Kinglets come at a certain early spring date
before the leaves are fully expanded, and flutter upward, while they
take something from beneath the budding leaf or twig. It is a peculiar
motion, which with their restless ways, olive-green color, and small
size, readily distinguishes them. It is rare that one is still. "But the
ruby-crowned sometimes favors me with a song, and as it is a little
long, he usually is quiet till done. It is one of the sweetest little
lullaby-like strains. One day I saw him in the rose bush just near
voluntarily expand the plumage of his crown and show the brilliant
golden-ruby feathers beneath. Usually they are mostly concealed. It was
a rare treat, and visible to me only because of my rather exalted view.
He generally reserves this display for his mate, but he was here among
some Snow-birds and Tree Sparrows, and seemed to be trying to make these
plain folks envious of the pretty feathers in his hat."

These wonderfully dainty little birds are of great value to the farmer
and the fruit grower, doing good work among all classes of fruit trees
by killing grubs and larvae. In spite of their value in this respect,
they have been, in common with many other attractive birds, recklessly
killed for millinery purposes.

It is curious to see these busy wanderers, who are always cheery and
sociable, come prying and peering about the fruit trees, examining every
little nook of possible concealment with the greatest interest. They do
not stay long after November, and return again in April.

The nest of this Kinglet is rarely seen. It is of matted hair, feathers,
moss, etc., bulky, round, and partly hanging. Until recently the eggs
were unknown. They are of a dirty cream-white, deepening at larger end
to form a ring, some specimens being spotted.

Mr. Nehrling, who has heard this Kinglet sing in central Wisconsin
and northern Illinois, speaks of the "power, purity, and volume of
the notes, their faultless modulation and long continuance," and
Dr. Elliott Coues says of it: "The Kinglet's exquisite vocalization
defies description." Dr. Brewer says that its song is clear, resonant,
and high, a prolonged series, varying from the lowest tones to the
highest, and terminating with the latter. It may be heard at quite a
distance, and in some respects bears more resemblance to the song of
the English Sky-lark than to that of the Canary, to which Mr. Audubon
compares it.

 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                RUBY-CROWNED KINGLET.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]




THE MOURNING DOVE.


DEAR YOUNG BIRD LOVERS:

Most every person thinks that, while my actions are very pretty and
attractive, and speak much in my favor, I can only really say, _Coo-o,
Coo-o_, which they also think does not mean anything at all. Well, I
just thought I would undeceive them by writing you a letter. Many grown
up people fancy that we birds cannot express ourselves because we don't
know very much. Of course, there is a good reason why they have this
poor opinion of us. They are so busy with their own private concerns
that they forget that there are little creatures like ourselves in the
world who, if they would take a little time to become acquainted with
them, would fill their few hours of leisure with a sweeter recreation
than they find in many of their chosen outings. A great English poet,
whose writings you will read when you get older, said you should look
through Nature up to Nature's God. What did he mean? I think he had us
birds in his mind, for it is through a study of our habits, more perhaps
than that of the voiceless trees or the dumb four-footed creatures
that roam the fields, that your hearts are opened to see and admire
real beauty. We birds are the true teachers of faith, hope, and
charity,--faith, because we trust one another; hope, because, even when
our mother Nature seems unkind, sending the drifting snow and the bitter
blasts of winter, we sing a song of summer time; and charity, because we
are never fault finders.

I believe, without knowing it, I have been telling you about myself and
my mate. We Doves are very sincere, and every one says we are constant.

If you live in the country, children, you must often hear our voices. We
are so tender and fond of each other that we are looked upon as models
for children, and even grown-up folks. My mate does not build a very
nice nest--only uses a few sticks to keep the eggs from falling out--but
she is a good mother and nurses the little ones very tenderly. Some
people are so kind that they build for us a dove cote, supply us with
wheat and corn, and make our lives as free from care and danger as they
can. Come and see us some day, and then you can tell whether my picture
is a good one. The artist thinks it is and he certainly took lots of
pains with it.

Now, if you will be kind to all birds, you will find me, in name only,

                                                        MOURNING DOVE.

 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                MOURNING DOVE.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]




HOW THE BIRDS SECURED THEIR RIGHTS.

     Deuteronomy xxxii 6-7.--"If a bird's nest chance to be before
     thee in the way, in any tree, or on the ground, young ones or
     eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs,
     thou shalt not take the dam with the young. But thou shalt in
     anywise let the dam go, that it may be well with thee, and that
     thou may prolong thy days."


It is said that the following petition was instrumental in securing the
adoption in Massachusetts of a law prohibiting the wearing of song and
insectivorous birds on women's hats. It is stated that the interesting
document was prepared by United States Senator Hoar. The foregoing verse
of Scripture might have been quoted by the petitioning birds to
strengthen their position before the lawmakers:

"TO THE GREAT AND GENERAL COURT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS:
We, the song birds of Massachusetts and their playfellows, make this our
humble petition. We know more about you than you think we do. We know
how good you are. We have hopped about the roofs and looked in at the
windows of the houses you have built for poor and sick and hungry
people, and little lame and deaf and blind children. We have built our
nests in the trees and sung many a song as we flew about the gardens and
parks you have made so beautiful for your children, especially your poor
children, to play in. Every year we fly a great way over the country,
keeping all the time where the sun is bright and warm. And we know that
whenever you do anything the other people all over this great land
between the seas and the great lakes find it out, and pretty soon will
try to do the same. We know. We know.

"We are Americans just the same as you are. Some of us, like some of
you, came across the great sea. But most of the birds like us have lived
here a long while; and the birds like us welcomed your fathers when they
came here many, many years ago. Our fathers and mothers have always
done their best to please your fathers and mothers.

"Now we have a sad story to tell you. Thoughtless or bad people are
trying to destroy us. They kill us because our feathers are beautiful.
Even pretty and sweet girls, who we should think would be our best
friends, kill our brothers and children so that they may wear our
plumage on their hats. Sometimes people kill us for mere wantonness.
Cruel boys destroy our nests and steal our eggs and our young ones.
People with guns and snares lie in wait to kill us; as if the place for
a bird were not in the sky, alive, but in a shop window or in a glass
case. If this goes on much longer all our song birds will be gone.
Already we are told in some other countries that used to be full of
birds they are now almost gone. Even the Nightingales are being killed
in Italy.

"Now we humbly pray that you will stop all this and will save us from
this sad fate. You have already made a law that no one shall kill a
harmless song bird or destroy our nests or our eggs. Will you please
make another one that no one shall wear our feathers, so that no one
shall kill us to get them? We want them all ourselves. Your pretty girls
are pretty enough without them. We are told that it is as easy for you
to do it as for a blackbird to whistle.

"If you will, we know how to pay you a hundred times over. We will
teach your children to keep themselves clean and neat. We will show
them how to live together in peace and love and to agree as we do in
our nests. We will build pretty houses which you will like to see. We
will play about your garden and flowerbeds--ourselves like flowers on
wings--without any cost to you. We will destroy the wicked insects and
worms that spoil your cherries and currants and plums and apples and
roses. We will give you our best songs, and make the spring more
beautiful and the summer sweeter to you. Every June morning when you go
out into the field, Oriole and Bluebird and Blackbird and Bobolink will
fly after you, and make the day more delightful to you. And when you go
home tired after sundown Vesper Sparrow will tell you how grateful we
are. When you sit down on your porch after dark, Fifebird and Hermit
Thrush and Wood Thrush will sing to you; and even Whip-poor-will will
cheer you up a little. We know where we are safe. In a little while all
the birds will come to live in Massachusetts again, and everybody who
loves music will like to make a summer home with you."

The singers are:

 Brown Thrasher,         King Bird,
 Robert o'Lincoln,       Swallow,
 Vesper Sparrow,         Cedar Bird,
 Hermit Thrush,          Cow-bird,
 Robin Redbreast,        Martin,
 Song Sparrow,           Veery,
 Scarlet Tanager,        Vireo,
 Summer Redbird,         Oriole,
 Blue Heron,             Blackbird,
 Humming Bird,           Fifebird,
 Yellow-bird,            Wren,
 Whip-poor-will,         Linnet,
 Water Wagtail,          Pewee,
 Woodpecker,             Phoebe,
 Pigeon Woodpecker,      Yoke Bird,
 Indigo Bird,            Lark,
 Yellow Throat,          Sandpiper,
 Wilson's Thrush,        Chewink.
 Chickadee,




THE CAPTIVE'S ESCAPE.


    I saw such a sorrowful sight, my dears,
      Such a sad and sorrowful sight,
    As I lingered under the swaying vines,
      In the silvery morning light.
    The skies were so blue and the day was so fair
      With beautiful things untold,
    You would think no sad and sorrowful thing
      Could enter its heart of gold.

    A fairy-like cage was hanging there,
      So gay with turret and dome.
    You'd be sure a birdie would gladly make
      Such a beautiful place its home.
    But a wee little yellow-bird sadly chirped
      As it fluttered to and fro;
    I know it was longing with all its heart
      To its wild-wood home to go.

    I heard a whir of swift-rushing wings,
      And an answering gladsome note;
    As close to its nestlings' prison bars,
      I saw the poor mother bird float.
    I saw her flutter and strive in vain
      To open the prison door.
    Then sadly cling with drooping wing
      As if all her hopes were o'er.

    But ere I could reach the prison house
      And let its sweet captive free,
    She was gone like a yellow flash of light,
      To her home in a distant tree.
    "Poor birdie," I thought, "you shall surely go,
      When mamma comes back again;"
    For it hurt me so that so small a thing
      Should suffer so much of pain.

    And back in a moment she came again
      And close to her darling's side
    With a bitter-sweet drop of honey dew,
      Which she dropped in its mouth so wide.
    Then away, with a strange wild mournful note
      Of sorrow, which seemed to say
    "Goodbye, my darling, my birdie dear,
      Goodbye for many a day."

    A quick wild flutter of tiny wings,
      A faint low chirp of pain,
    A throb of the little aching heart
      And birdie was free again.
    Oh sorrowful anguished mother-heart,
      'Twas all that she could do,
    She had set it free from a captive's life
      In the only way she knew.

    Poor little birdie! it never will fly
      On tiny and tireless wing.
    Through the pearly blue of the summer sky,
      Or sing the sweet songs of spring.
    And I think, little dears, if you had seen
      The same sad sorrowful sight,
    You never would cage a free wild bird
      To suffer a captive's plight.
                               --MARY MORRISON.




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                WHITE-BREASTED NUTHATCH.
                Copyrighted by Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]

THE WHITE-BREASTED NUTHATCH.


Nearly every one readily recognizes this species as it runs up and
down and around the branches and trunks of trees in search of insect
food, now and then uttering its curious _Quauk, quauk, quauk_. The
White-breasted Nuthatch is often improperly called "Sapsucker," a name
commonly applied to the Downy Woodpecker and others. It is a common
breeding bird and usually begins nesting early in April, and two broods
are frequently reared in a season. For its nesting place it usually
selects the decayed trunk of a tree or stub, ranging all the way from
two to sixty feet above the ground. The entrance may be a knot hole, a
small opening, or a small round hole with a larger cavity at the end of
it. Often the old excavation of the Downy Woodpecker is made use of.
Chicken feathers, hair, and a few dry leaves loosely thrown together
compose the nest.

This Nuthatch is abundant throughout the State of Illinois, and is a
permanent resident everywhere except perhaps of the extreme northern
counties. It seems to migrate in spring and return in autumn, but, in
reality, as is well known, only retreats to the woodlands to breed,
emerging again when the food supply grows scant in the autumn.

The Nuthatches associate familiarly with the Kinglets and Titmice, and
often travel with them. Though regarded as shy birds they are not really
so. Their habits of restlessness render them difficult of examination.
"Tree-mice" is the local name given them by the farmers, and would be
very appropriate could they sometimes remain as motionless as that
diminutive animal.

Careful observation has disclosed that the Nuthatches do not suck
the sap from trees, but that they knock off bits of decayed or loose
bark with the beak to obtain the grubs or larvae beneath. They are
beneficial to vegetation. Ignorance is responsible for the misapplied
names given to many of our well disposed and useful birds, and it would
be well if teachers were to discourage the use of inappropriate names
and familiarize the children with those recognized by the best
authorities.

Referring to the Nuthatches Mr. Baskett says: "They are little bluish
gray birds, with white undervests--sometimes a little soiled. Their
tails are ridiculously short, and never touch the tree; neither does the
body, unless they are suddenly affrighted, when they crouch and look,
with their beaks extended, much like a knot with a broken twig on it. I
have sometimes put the bird into this attitude by clapping my hands
loudly near the window. It is an impulse that seems to come to the bird
before flight, especially if the head should be downward. His arrival
is sudden, and seems often to be distinguished by turning a somersault
before alighting, head downward, on the tree trunk, as if he had changed
his mind so suddenly about alighting that it unbalanced him.

"I once saw two Nuthatches at what I then supposed was a new habit.
One spring day some gnats were engaged in their little crazy love
waltzes in the air, forming small whirling clouds, and the birds left
off bark-probing and began capturing insects on the wing. They were
awkward about it with their short wings, and had to alight frequently
to rest. I went out to them, and so absorbed were they that they allowed
me to approach within a yard of a limb that they came to rest upon, where
they would sit and pant till they caught their breath, when they went at
it again. They seemed fairly to revel in a new diet and a new exercise."




SUMMARY


Page 83.

#YELLOW WARBLER.#--_Dendroica æstiva._ Other names:
"Summer Yellow-bird," "Wild Canary," "Yellow-poll Warbler."

RANGE--The whole of North America; breeding throughout its range. In
winter, the whole of middle America and northern South America.

NEST--Built in an apple tree, cup-shaped, neat and compact, composed of
plant fibres, bark, etc.

EGGS--Four or five; greenish-white, spotted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 88.

#HERMIT THRUSH.#--_Turdus aonalaschkæ pallasii._ Other names:
"Swamp Angel," "Ground Swamp Robin."

RANGE--Eastern North America, breeding from northern United States
northward; wintering from about latitude 40° to the Gulf coast.

NEST--On the ground, in some low, secluded spot, beneath shelter of deep
shrubbery. Bulky and loosely made of leaves, bark, grasses, mosses,
lined with similar finer material.

EGGS--Three or four; of greenish blue, unspotted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 91.

#SONG SPARROW.#--_Melospiza fasciata._

RANGE--Eastern United States and British Provinces, west to the Plains,
breeding chiefly north of 40°, except east of the Alleghenies.

NEST--On the ground, or in low bushes, of grasses, weeds, and leaves,
lined with fine grass stems, roots, and, in some cases, hair.

EGGS--Four to seven; varying in color from greenish or pinkish white to
light bluish green, spotted with dark reddish brown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 95.

#YELLOW-BILLED CUCKOO.#--_Coccyzus americanus._ Other names:
"Rain Crow," "Rain Dove," and "Chow-Chow."

RANGE--Eastern North America to British Provinces, west to Great Plains,
south in winter, West Indies and Costa Rica.

NEST--In low tree or bush, of dried sticks, bark strips and catkins.

EGGS--Two to four; of glaucous green which fades on exposure to the
light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 100.

#RUBY-THROATED HUMMING BIRD.#--_Trochilus colubris._

RANGE--Eastern North America to the Plains north to the fur countries,
and south in winter to Cuba and Veragua.

NEST--A circle an inch and a half in diameter, made of fern wool, etc.,
shingled with lichens to match the color of the branch on which it is
saddled.

EGGS--Two; pure white, the size of soup beans.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 101.

#HOUSE WREN.#--_Troglodytes aedon._

RANGE--Eastern United States and southern Canada, west to the
Mississippi Valley; winters in southern portions.

NEST--Miscellaneous rubbish, sticks, grasses, hay, and the like.

EGGS--Usually seven; white, dotted with reddish brown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 106.

#PHOEBE.#--_Sayornis phoebe._ Other names: "Pewit," "Pewee."

RANGE--Eastern North America; in winter south to Mexico and Cuba.

NEST--Compactly and neatly made of mud and vegetable substances, with
lining of grass and feathers.

EGGS--Four or five; pure white, sometimes sparsely spotted with reddish
brown dots at larger end.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 110.

#RUBY-CROWNED KINGLET.#--_Regulus calendula._

RANGE--Entire North America, wintering in the South and in northern
Central America.

NEST--Very rare, only six known; of hair, feathers, moss, etc., bulky,
globular, and partly pensile.

EGGS--Five to nine; dull whitish or pale puffy, speckled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 113.

#MOURNING DOVE.#--_Zenaidura macrura._ Other names:
"Carolina Dove," "Turtle Dove."

RANGE--Whole of temperate North America, south to Panama and the West
Indies.

NEST--Rim of twigs sufficient to retain the eggs.

EGGS--Usually two; white.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 118.

#WHITE-BREASTED NUTHATCH.#--_Sitta carolinensis._ Other name:
"Sapsucker," improperly called.

RANGE--Eastern United States and British Provinces.

NEST--Decayed trunk of tree or stub, from two to six feet from ground,
composed of chicken feathers, hair, and dry leaves.

EGGS--Five to eight; white with a roseate tinge, speckled with reddish
brown and a slight tinge of purple.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds, Illustrated by Color
Photography, Vol. II, No 3, September 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS, ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR ***

***** This file should be named 30511-8.txt or 30511-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/1/30511/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, some
images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
