The Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds, Illustrated by Color Photography
[July 1897], by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Birds, Illustrated by Color Photography [July 1897]
       A Monthly Serial designed to Promote Knowledge of Bird-Life

Author: Various

Release Date: November 21, 2009 [EBook #30523]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS, ILLUSTRATED [JULY 1897] ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, some
images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net







 BIRDS

 A MONTHLY SERIAL

 ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY

 DESIGNED TO PROMOTE

 KNOWLEDGE OF BIRD-LIFE


 VOLUME II.


 CHICAGO.
 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY.




 COPYRIGHT, 1897
 BY
 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING CO.
 CHICAGO.




INTRODUCTION.


This is the second volume of a series intended to present, in accurate
colored portraiture, and in popular and juvenile biographical text, a
very considerable portion of the common birds of North America, and many
of the more interesting and attractive specimens of other countries, in
many respects superior to all other publications which have attempted
the representation of birds, and at infinitely less expense. The
appreciative reception by the public of Vol. I deserves our grateful
acknowledgement. Appearing in monthly parts, it has been read and
admired by thousands of people, who, through the life-like pictures
presented, have made the acquaintance of many birds, and have since
become enthusiastic observers of them. It has been introduced into
the public schools, and is now in use as a text book by hundreds of
teachers, who have expressed enthusiastic approval of the work and of
its general extension. The faithfulness to nature of the pictures, in
color and pose, have been commended by such ornithologists and authors
as Dr. Elliott Coues, Mr. John Burroughs, Mr. J. W. Allen, editor of
_The Auk_, Mr. Frank M. Chapman, Mr. J. W. Baskett, and others.

The general text of BIRDS--the biographies--has been conscientiously
prepared from the best authorities by a careful observer of the
feather-growing denizens of the field, the forest, and the shore, while
the juvenile autobiographies have received the approval of the highest
ornithological authority.

The publishers take pleasure in the announcement that the general
excellence of BIRDS will be maintained in subsequent volumes. The
subjects selected for the third and fourth volumes--many of them--will
be of the rare beauty in which the great Audubon, the limner _par
excellence_ of birds, would have found "the joy of imitation."

                                      NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY.




                       BIRDS.
         ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY
         ================================
         VOL. II.       JULY        NO. 1
         ================================




BIRD SONG.


It should not be overlooked by the young observer that if he would
learn to recognize at once any particular bird, he should make himself
acquainted with the song and call notes of every bird around him. The
identification, however, of the many feathered creatures with which we
meet in our rambles has heretofore required so much patience, that,
though a delight to the enthusiast, few have time to acquire any great
intimacy with them. To get this acquaintance with the birds, the
observer has need to be prepared to explore perilous places, to climb
lofty trees, and to meet with frequent mishaps. To be sure if every
veritable secret of their habits is to be pried into, this pursuit will
continue to be plied as patiently as it has ever been. The opportunity,
however, to secure a satisfactory knowledge of bird song and bird life
by a most delightful method has at last come to every one.

A gentleman who has taken a great interest in BIRDS from the appearance
of the first number, but whose acquaintance with living birds is quite
limited, visited one of our parks a few days ago, taking with him the
latest number of the magazine. His object, he said, was to find there
as many of the living forms of the specimens represented as he could.
"Seating myself amidst a small grove of trees, what was my delight at
seeing a Red Wing alight on a telegraph wire stretching across the park.
Examining the picture in BIRDS I was somewhat disappointed to find that
the live specimen was not so brilliantly marked as in the picture.
Presently, however, another Blackbird alighted near, who seemed to be
the veritable presentment of the photograph. Then it occured to me
that I had seen the Red Wing before, without knowing its name. It kept
repeating a rich, juicy note, _oncher-la-ree-e!_ its tail tetering at
quick intervals. A few days later I observed a large number of Red Wings
near the Hyde Park water works, in the vicinity of which, among the
trees and in the marshes, I also saw many other birds unknown to me.
With BIRDS in my hands, I identified the Robin, who ran along the ground
quite close to me, anon summoning with his beak the incautious angle
worm to the surface. The Jays were noisy and numerous, and I observed
many new traits in the Wood Thrush, so like the Robin that I was at
first in some doubt about it. I heard very few birds sing that day, most
of them being busy in search of food for their young."

[CONTINUED ON PAGE 17.]




THE BALD-HEADED EAGLE.


Dear Boys and Girls:

I had hoped to show you the picture of the eagle that went through the
war with the soldiers. They called him "Old Abe." You will find on page
35 a long story written about him. Ask some one to read it to you.

I could not get "Old Abe," or you should now be looking at his picture.
He is at present in Wisconsin, and his owner would not allow him to be
taken from home.

I did the next best thing, and found one that was very much like him.
They are as near alike as two children of a family. Old Abe's feathers
are not quite so smooth, though. Do you wonder, after having been
through the war? He is a veteran, isn't he?

The picture is that of a Bald-headed Eagle. He is known, also, by other
names, such as White-headed Eagle, Bird of Washington, Sea Eagle.

You can easily see by the picture that he is not bald-headed. The name
White-headed would seem a better name. It is because at a distance his
head and neck appear as though they were covered with a white skin.

He is called "Sea Eagle" because his food is mostly fish. He takes the
fish that are thrown upon the shores by the waves, and sometimes he robs
the Fish Hawk of his food.

This mighty bird usually places his large nest in some tall tree. He
uses sticks three to five feet long, large pieces of sod, weeds, moss,
and whatever he can find.

The nest is sometimes five or six feet through. Eagles use the same nest
for years, adding to it each year.

Young eagles are queer looking birds. When hatched, they are covered
with a soft down that looks like cotton.

Their parents feed them, and do not allow them to leave the nest until
they are old enough to fly. When they are old enough, the mother bird
pushes them out of the nest. She must be sure that they can fly, or she
would not dare do this. Don't you think so?

 [Illustration: From col. Chi. Acad. Sciences.
                AMERICAN BALD EAGLE.]




THE BALD-HEADED EAGLE.


This mighty bird of lofty flight is a native of the whole of North
America, and may be seen haunting the greater portions of the sea
coasts, as well as the mouths of large rivers. He is sometimes called
the White-headed Eagle, the American Sea Eagle, the Bird of Washington,
the Washington Eagle, and the Sea Eagle. On account of the snowy white
of his head and neck, the name Bald Eagle has been applied to him more
generally than any other.

Sea-faring men are partial to young Eagles as pets, there being a well
established superstition among them that the ship that carries the "King
of Birds" can never go down. The old Romans, in selecting the Eagle as
an emblem for their imperial standard, showed this superstitious belief,
regarding him as the favorite messenger of Jupiter, holding communion
with heaven. The Orientals, too, believed that the feathers of the
Eagle's tail rendered their arrows invincible. The Indian mountain
tribes east of Tennessee venerated the Eagle as their bird of war, and
placed a high value on his feathers, which they used for headdresses and
to decorate their pipes of peace.

The United States seems to have an abiding faith in the great bird, as
our minted dollars show.

The nest of the Bald Eagle is usually placed upon the top of a giant
tree, standing far up on the side of a mountain, among myriads of
twining vines, or on the summit of a high inaccessible rock. The nest in
the course of years, becomes of great size as the Eagle lays her eggs
year after year in the same nest, and at each nesting season adds new
material to the old nest. It is strongly and comfortably built with
large sticks and branches, nearly flat, and bound together with twining
vines. The spacious interior is lined with hair and moss, so minutely
woven together as to exclude the wind. The female lays two eggs of a
brownish red color, with many dots and spots, the long end of the egg
tapering to a point. The parents are affectionate, attend to their young
as long as they are helpless and unfledged, and will not forsake them
even though the tree on which they rest be enveloped in flames. When the
Eaglets are ready to fly, however, the parents push them from the perch
and trust them to the high atmospheric currents. They turn them out, so
to speak, to shift for themselves.

The Bald Eagle has an accommodating appetite, eating almost anything
that has ever had life. He is fond of fish, without being a great
fisher, preferring to rob the Fish-hawk of the fruits of his skillful
labor. Sitting upon the side of a mountain his keen vision surveys
the plain or valley, and detects a sheep, a young goat, a fat turkey
or rooster, a pig, a rabbit or a large bird, and almost within an
eye-twinkle he descends upon his victim. A mighty grasp, a twist of his
talons, and the quarry is dead long before the Eagle lays it down for a
repast. The impetuosity and skill with which he pursues, overtakes and
robs the Fish-hawk, and the swiftness with which the Bald Eagle darts
down upon and seizes the booty, which the Hawk has been compelled to let
go, is not the least wonderful part of this striking performance.

The longevity of the Eagle is very great, from 80 to 160 years.




THE SEMI-PALMATED RING PLOVER.


In their habits the Plovers are usually active; they run and fly with
equal facility, and though they rarely attempt to swim, are not
altogether unsuccessful in that particular.

The Semi-palmated Ring Plover utters a plaintive whistle, and during the
nesting season can produce a few connected pleasing notes. The three or
four pear-shaped, variagated eggs are deposited in a slight hollow in
the ground, in which a few blades of grass are occasionally placed. Both
parents assist in rearing the young. Worms, small quadrupeds, and
insects constitute their food. Their flesh is regarded as a delicacy,
and they are therefore objects of great attraction to the sportsman,
although they often render themselves extremely troublesome by uttering
their shrill cry and thus warning their feathered companions of the
approach of danger. From this habit they have received the name of
"tell-tales." Dr. Livingstone said of the African species: "A most
plaguey sort of public spirited individual follows you everywhere,
flying overhead, and is most persevering in his attempts to give fair
warning to all animals within hearing to flee from the approach of
danger."

The American Ring Plover nests as far north as Labrador, and is common
on our shores from August to October, after which it migrates southward.
Some are stationary in the southern states. It is often called the Ring
Plover, and has been supposed to be identical with the European Ringed
Plover.

It is one of the commonest of shore birds. It is found along the beaches
and easily identified by the complete neck ring, white upon dark and
dark upon light. Like the Sandpipers the Plovers dance along the shore
in rhythm with the wavelets, leaving sharp half-webbed footprints on the
wet sand. Though usually found along the seashore, Samuels says that on
their arrival in spring, small flocks follow the courses of large
rivers, like the Connecticut. He also found a single pair building on
Muskeget, the famous haunt of Gulls, off the shore of Massachusetts. It
has been found near Chicago, Illinois, in July.




 [Illustration: RING PLOVER.]

THE RING PLOVER.


Plovers belong to a class of birds called Waders.

They spend the winters down south, and early in the spring begin their
journey north. By the beginning of summer they are in the cold north,
where they lay their eggs and hatch their young. Here they remain until
about the month of August, when they begin to journey southward. It is
on their way back that we see most of them.

While on their way north, they are in a hurry to reach their nesting
places, so only stop here and there for food and rest.

Coming back with their families, we often see them in ploughed fields.
Here they find insects and seeds to eat.

The Ring Plover is so called from the white ring around its neck.

These birds are not particular about their nests. They do not build
comfortable nests as most birds do. They find a place that is sheltered
from the north winds, and where the sun will reach them. Here they make
a rude nest of the mosses lying around.

The eggs are somewhat pointed, and placed in the nest with the points
toward the center. In this way the bird can more easily cover the eggs.

We find, among most birds, that after the nest is made, the mother bird
thinks it her duty to hatch the young.

The father bird usually feeds her while she sits on the eggs. In some of
the bird stories, you have read how the father and mother birds take
turns in building the nest, sitting on the nest, and feeding the young.

Some father birds do all the work in building the nest, and take care of
the birds when hatched.

Among plovers, the father bird usually hatches the young, and lets the
wife do as she pleases.

After the young are hatched they help each other take care of them.

Plovers have long wings, and can fly very swiftly.

The distance between their summer and winter homes is sometimes very
great.




THE MALLARD DUCK.


We should probably think this the most beautiful of ducks, were the Wood
Duck not around.

His rich glossy-green head and neck, snowy white collar, and curly
feathers of the tail are surely marks of beauty.

But Mr. Mallard is not so richly dressed all of the year. Like a great
many other birds, he changes his clothes after the holiday season is
over. When he does this, you can hardly tell him from his mate who wears
a sober dress all the year.

Most birds that change their plumage wear their bright, beautiful dress
during the summer. Not so with Mr. Mallard. He wears his holiday clothes
during the winter. In the summer he looks much like his mate.

Usually the Mallard family have six to ten eggs in their nest. They are
of a pale greenish color--very much like the eggs of our tame ducks that
we see about the barnyards.

Those who have studied birds say that our tame ducks are descendants of
the Mallards.

If you were to hear the Mallard's _quack_, you could not tell it from
that of the domestic duck.

The Mallard usually makes her nest of grass, and lines it with down from
her breast. You will almost always find it on the ground, near the
water, and well sheltered by weeds and tall grasses.

It isn't often you see a duck with so small a family. It must be that
some of the ducklings are away picking up food.

Do you think they look like young chickens?

 [Illustration: From col. Chi. Acad. Sciences.
                MALLARD DUCK.]




THE MALLARD DUCK.


The Mallard Duck is generally distributed in North America, migrating
south in winter to Panama, Cuba, and the Bahamas. In summer the full
grown male resembles the female, being merely somewhat darker in color.
The plumage is donned by degrees in early June, and in August the full
rich winter dress is again resumed. The adult males in winter plumage
vary chiefly in the extent and richness of the chestnut of the breast.

The Mallard is probably the best known of all our wild ducks, being very
plentiful and remarkable on account of its size. Chiefly migrant, a few
sometimes remain in the southern portion of Illinois, and a few pairs
sometimes breed in the more secluded localities where they are free from
disturbance. Its favorite resorts are margins of ponds and streams,
pools and ditches. It is an easy walker, and can run with a good deal of
speed, or dive if forced to do so, though it never dives for food. It
feeds on seeds of grasses, fibrous roots of plants, worms, shell fish,
and insects. In feeding in shallow water the bird keeps the hind part of
its body erect, while it searches the muddy bottom with its bill. When
alarmed and made to fly, it utters a loud quack, the cry of the female
being the louder. "It feeds silently, but after hunger is satisfied, it
amuses itself with various jabberings, swims about, moves its head
backward and forward, throws water over its back, shoots along the
surface, half flying, half running, and seems quite playful. If alarmed,
the Mallard springs up at once with a bound, rises obliquely to a
considerable height, and flies off with great speed, the wings producing
a whistling sound. The flight is made by repeated flaps, without
sailing, and when in full flight its speed is hardly less than a hundred
miles an hour."

Early in spring the male and female seek a nesting place, building on
the ground, in marshes or among water plants, sometimes on higher
ground, but never far from water. The nest is large and rudely made of
sedges and coarse grasses, seldom lined with down or feathers. In rare
instances it nests in trees, using the deserted nests of hawks, crows,
or other large birds. Six or eight eggs of pale dull green are hatched,
and the young are covered over with down. When the female leaves the
nest she conceals the eggs with hay, down, or any convenient material.
As soon as hatched the chicks follow the mother to the water, where
she attends them devotedly, aids them in procuring food, and warns
them of danger. While they are attempting to escape, she feigns
lameness to attract to herself the attention of the enemy. The chicks
are wonderfully active little fellows, dive quickly, and remain under
water with only the bill above the surface.

On a lovely morning, before the sun has fairly indicated his returning
presence, there can be no finer sight than the hurrying pinions, or
inspiring note than the squawk, oft repeated, of these handsome
feathered creatures, as they seek their morning meal in the lagoons
and marshes.




THE AMERICAN AVOCET.


White Snipe, Yelper, Lawyer, and Scooper are some of the popular
names applied in various localities to this remarkably long-legged and
long and slender-necked creature, which is to be found in temperate
North America, and, in winter, as far south as Cuba and Jamaica. In
north-eastern Illinois the Avocet generally occurs in small parties the
last of April and the first of May, and during September and the early
part of October, when it frequents the borders of marshy pools. The
bird combines the characteristics of the Curlew and the Godwit, the bill
being recurved.

The cinnamon color on the head and neck of this bird varies with the
individual; sometimes it is dusky gray around the eye, especially in the
younger birds.

The Avocet is interesting and attractive in appearance, without having
any especially notable characteristics. He comes and goes and is rarely
seen by others than sportsmen.

 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                AMERICAN AVOCET.]




BIRD SONG--Continued from page 1.


Many of our singing birds may be easily identified by any one who
carries in his mind the images which are presented in our remarkable
pictures. See the birds at home, as it were, and hear their songs.

Those who fancy that few native birds live in our parks will be
surprised to read the following list of them now visible to the eyes of
so careful an observer as Mr. J. Chester Lyman.

"About the 20th of May I walked one afternoon in Lincoln Park with a
friend whose early study had made him familiar with birds generally, and
we noted the following varieties:

     1 Magnolia Warbler.
     2 Yellow Warbler.
     3 Black Poll Warbler.
     4 Black-Throated Blue Warbler.
     5 Black-Throated Queen Warbler.
     6 Blackburnian Warbler.
     7 Chestnut-sided Warbler.
     8 Golden-crowned Thrush.
     9 Wilson's Thrush.
    10 Song Thrush.
    11 Catbird.
    12 Bluebird.
    13 Kingbird.
    14 Least Fly Catcher.
    15 Wood Pewee Fly Catcher.
    16 Great Crested Fly Catcher.
    17 Red-eyed Vireo.
    18 Chimney Swallow.
    19 Barn Swallow.
    20 Purple Martin.
    21 Red Start.
    22 House Wren.
    23 Purple Grackle.
    24 White-throated Sparrow.
    25 Song Sparrow.
    26 Robin.
    27 Blue Jay.
    28 Red-Headed Woodpecker.
    29 Kingfisher.
    30 Night Hawk.
    31 Yellow-Billed Cuckoo.
    32 Scarlet Tanager, Male and Female.
    33 Black and White Creeper.
    34 Gull, or Wilson's Tern.
    35 The Omni-present English Sparrow.

"On a similar walk, one week earlier, we saw about the same number of
varieties, including, however, the Yellow Breasted Chat, and the
Mourning, Bay Breasted, and Blue Yellow Backed Warblers."

The sweetest songsters are easily accessible, and all may enjoy their
presence.

                                                  C. C. MARBLE.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE CANVAS-BACK DUCK.


White-Back, Canard Cheval, (New Orleans,) Bull-Neck, and Red-Headed
Bull-Neck, are common names of the famous Canvas-Back, which nests from
the northern states, northward to Alaska. Its range is throughout nearly
all of North America, wintering from the Chesapeake southward to
Guatemala.

"The biography of this duck," says Mabel Osgood Wright, "belongs rather
to the cook-book than to a bird list," even its most learned biographers
referring mainly to its "eatable qualities," Dr. Coues even taking away
its character in that respect when he says "there is little reason for
squealing in barbaric joy over this over-rated and generally under-done
bird; not one person in ten thousand can tell it from any other duck on
the table, and only then under the celery circumstances," referring to
the particular flavor of its flesh, when at certain seasons it feeds on
vallisneria, or "water celery," which won its fame. This is really not
celery at all, but an eel-grass, not always found through the range of
the Canvas-Back. When this is scarce it eats frogs, lizards, tadpoles,
fish, etc., so that, says Mrs. Osgood, "a certificate of residence
should be sold with every pair, to insure the inspiring flavor."

The opinion held as to the edible qualities of this species varies
greatly in different parts of the country. No where has it so high a
reputation as in the vicinity of Chesapeake Bay, where the alleged
superiority of its flesh is ascribed to the abundance of "water celery."
That this notion is erroneous is evident from the fact that the same
plant grows in far more abundance in the upper Mississippi Valley, where
also the Canvas-Back feeds on it. Hence it is highly probable that
fashion and imagination, or perhaps a superior style of cooking and
serving, play a very important part in the case. In California, however,
where the "water celery" does not grow, the Canvas-Back is considered a
very inferior bird for the table.

It has been hunted on Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries with such
inconsiderate greed that its numbers have been greatly reduced, and many
have been driven to more southern waters.

In and about Baltimore, the Canvas-Back, like the famous terrapin, is in
as high favor for his culinary excellence, as are the women for beauty
and hospitality. To gratify the healthy appetite of the human animal
this bird was doubtless sent by a kind Providence, none the less mindful
of the creature comforts and necessities of mankind than of the purely
aesthetic senses.

 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                CANVAS-BACK DUCK.]




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                WOOD DUCK.]

THE WOOD DUCK.


A great many people think that this is the most beautiful bird of North
America. It is called Wood Duck because it usually makes its nest in the
hollow of a tree that overhangs the water. If it can find a squirrel's
or woodpecker's hole in some stump or tree, there it is sure to nest.

A gentleman who delighted in watching the Wood Duck, tells about one
that built her nest in the hollow of a tree that hung over the water. He
was anxious to see how the little ones, when hatched, would get down.

In a few days he knew that the ducklings were out, for he could hear
their _pee, pee, pee_. They came to the edge of the nest, one by one,
and tumbled out into the water.

You know a duck can swim as soon as it comes out of the egg.

Sometimes the nest is in the hollow of a tree that is a short distance
from the water.

Now how do you suppose the ducklings get there as they do?

If the nest is not far from the ground, the mother bird lets them drop
from it on the dried grass and leaves under the tree. She then carries
them in her bill, one by one, to the water and back to the nest.

If the nest should be far from the ground, she carries them down one by
one.

This same gentleman says that he once saw a Wood Duck carry down
thirteen little ones in less than ten minutes. She took them in her bill
by the back of the neck or the wing.

When they are a few days old she needs only to lead the way and the
little ones will follow.

The Wood Duck is also called Summer Duck. This is because it does not
stay with us during the winter, as most ducks do.

It goes south to spend the winter and comes back north early in the
spring.




THE WOOD DUCK.


Quite the most beautiful of the native Ducks, with a a richness of
plumage which gives it a bridal or festive appearance, this bird is
specifically named _Spousa_, which means betrothed. It is also called
Summer Duck, Bridal Duck, Wood Widgeon, Acorn Duck and Tree Duck.

It is a fresh water fowl, and exclusively so in the selection of its
nesting haunts. It inhabits the whole of temperate North America, north
to the fur countries, and is found in Cuba and sometimes in Europe. Its
favorite haunts are wooded bottom-lands, where it frequents the streams
and ponds, nesting in hollows of the largest trees. Sometimes a hole in
a horizontal limb is chosen that seems too small to hold the Duck's
plump body, and occasionally it makes use of the hole of an Owl or
Woodpecker, the entrance to which has been enlarged by decay.

Wilson visited a tree containing a nest of a Wood or Summer Duck, on
the banks of Tuckahoe river, New Jersey. The tree stood on a declivity
twenty yards from the water, and in its hollow and broken top, about six
feet down, on the soft decayed wood were thirteen eggs covered with down
from the mother's breast. The eggs were of an exact oval shape, the
surface smooth and fine grained, of a yellowish color resembling old
polished ivory. This tree had been occupied by the same pair, during
nesting time, for four successive years. The female had been seen to
carry down from the nest thirteen young, one by one, in less than ten
minutes. She caught them in her bill by the wing or back of the neck,
landed them safely at the foot of the tree, and finally led them to the
water. If the nest be directly over the water, the little birds as soon
as hatched drop into the water, breaking their fall by extending their
wings.

Many stories are told of their attachment to their nesting places.
For several years one observer saw a pair of Wood Ducks make their
nest in the hollow of a hickory which stood on the bank, half a dozen
yards from a river. In preparing to dam the river near this point, in
order to supply water to a neighboring city, the course of the river
was diverted, leaving the old bed an eighth of a mile behind,
notwithstanding which the ducks bred in the old place, the female
undaunted by the distance which she would have to travel to lead her
brood to the water.

While the females are laying, and afterwards when sitting, the male
usually perches on an adjoining limb and keeps watch. The common note of
the drake is _peet-peet_, and when standing sentinel, if apprehending
danger, he makes a noise not unlike the crowing of a young cock,
_oe-eek_. The drake does not assist in sitting on the eggs, and the
female is left in the lurch in the same manner as the Partridge.

The Wood Duck has been repeatedly tamed and partially domesticated. It
feeds freely on corn meal soaked in water, and as it grows, catches
flies with great dexterity.




 [Illustration: From col. F. C. Baker.
                ANHINGA OR SNAKE BIRD.]

THE ANHINGA OR SNAKE BIRD.


The Snake Bird is very singular indeed in appearance, and interesting as
well in its habits. Tropical and sub-tropical America, north to the
Carolinas and Southern Illinois, where it is a regular summer resident,
are its known haunts. Here it is recognized by different names, as Water
Turkey, Darter, and Snake Bird. The last mentioned seems to be the most
appropriate name for it, as the shape of its head and neck at once
suggest the serpent. In Florida it is called the Grecian Lady, at the
mouth of the Mississippi, Water Crow, and in Louisiana, Bec a Lancette.
It often swims with the body entirely under water, its head and long
neck in sight like some species of water snakes, and has no doubt more
than once left the impression on the mind of the superstitious sailor
that he has seen a veritable sea serpent, the fear of which lead him to
exaggerate the size of it.

This bird so strange in looks and action is common in summer in the
South Atlantic and Gulf States, frequenting the almost impenetrable
swamps, and is a constant resident of Florida.

As a diver the Snake Bird is the most wonderful of all the Ducks. Like
the Loon it can disappear instantly and noiselessly, swim a long
distance and reappear almost in an opposite direction to that in which
naturally it would be supposed to go. And the ease with which, when
alarmed, it will drop from its perch and leave scarcely a ripple on the
surface of the water, would appear incredible in so large a bird, were
it not a well known fact. It has also the curious habit of sinking like
a Grebe.

The nests of the Anhinga are located in various places, sometimes in low
bushes at a height from the ground of only a few feet, or in the upper
branches of high trees, but always over water. Though web footed, it is
strong enough to grasp tightly the perch on which it nests. This gives
it a great advantage over the common Duck which can nest only on the
ground. Sometimes Snake Birds breed in colonies with various species of
Herons. From three to five eggs, bluish, or dark greenish white, are
usually found in the nest.

Prof. F. C. Baker, secretary of the Chicago Academy of Sciences, to whom
we are indebted for the specimen presented here, captured this bird at
Micco, Brevard Co., Florida, in April, 1889. He says he found a peculiar
parasite in the brain of the Anhinga.

The Anhingas consist of but one species, which has a representative in
the warmer parts of each of the great divisions of the earth. The number
seen together varies from eight or ten to several hundred.

The hair-like feathers on the neck form a sort of loose mane.

When asleep the bird stands with its body almost erect. In rainy weather
it often spends the greater part of the day in an erect attitude, with
its neck and head stretched upward, remaining perfectly motionless, so
that the water may glide off its plumage. The fluted tail is very thick
and beautiful and serves as a propeller as well as a rudder in
swimming.




THE AMERICAN WOODCOCK.


Isn't this American Woodcock, or indeed any member of the family, a
comical bird? His head is almost square, and what a remarkable eye he
has! It is a seeing eye, too, for he does not require light to enable
him to detect the food he seeks in the bogs. He has many names to
characterize him, such as Bog-sucker, Mud Snipe, Blind Snipe. His
greatest enemies are the pot hunters, who nevertheless have nothing but
praise to bestow upon him, his flesh is so exquisitely palatable. Even
those who deplore and deprecate the destruction of birds are not
unappreciative of his good qualities in this respect.

The Woodcock inhabits eastern North America, the north British
provinces, the Dakotas, Nebraska and Kansas, and breeds throughout the
range.

Night is the time when the Woodcock enjoys life. He never flies
voluntarily by day, but remains secluded in close and sheltered thickets
till twilight, when he seeks his favorite feeding places. His sight is
imperfect by day, but at night he readily secures his food, assisted
doubtless by an extraordinary sense of smell. His remarkably large and
handsome eye is too sensitive for the glare of the sun, and during the
greater part of the day he remains closely concealed in marshy thickets
or in rank grass. In the morning and evening twilight and on moonlight
nights, he seeks his food in open places. The early riser may find him
with ease, but the first glow from the rays of the morning sun will
cause his disappearance from the landscape.

He must be looked for in swamps, and in meadows with soft bottoms.
During very wet seasons he seeks higher land--usually cornfields--and
searches for food in the mellow plowed ground, where his presence is
indicated by holes made by his bill. In seasons of excessive drought the
Woodcock resorts in large numbers to tide water creeks and the banks of
fresh water rivers. So averse is he to an excess of water, that after
continued or very heavy rains he has been known suddenly to disappear
from widely extended tracts of country.

A curious habit of the Woodcock, and one that is comparatively little
known, is that of carrying its young in order to remove them from
danger. So many trustworthy naturalists maintain this to be true that it
must be accepted as characteristic of this interesting bird. She takes
her young from place to place in her toe grasps as scarcity of food or
safety may require.

As in the case of many birds whose colors adapt them to certain
localities or conditions of existence, the patterns of the beautiful
chestnut parts of the Woodcock mimic well the dead leaves and serve to
protect the female and her young. The whistle made by their wings when
flying is a manifestation of one of the intelligences of nature.

The male Woodcock, it is believed, when he gets his "intended" off
entirely to himself, exhibits in peculiar dances and jigs that he is
hers and hers only, or rises high on the wing cutting the most peculiar
capers and gyrations in the air, protesting to her in the grass beneath
the most earnest devotion, or advertising to her his whereabouts.




 [Illustration From col. Chi. Acad. Sciences.
               AMERICAN WOODCOCK.]

THE WOODCOCK.


Here is a bird that is not often seen in the daytime. During the day he
stays in the deep woods or among the tall marsh grasses.

It is at twilight that you may see him. He then comes out in search of
food.

Isn't he an odd-looking bird? His bill is made long so that he can bore
into the soft ground for earthworms.

You notice his color is much like the Ruffed Grouse in June "BIRDS."
This seems to be the color of a great many birds whose home is among the
grasses and dried leaves. Maybe you can see a reason for this.

Those who have watched the Woodcock carefully, say that he can move the
tip end of the upper part of his bill. This acts like a finger in
helping him to draw his food from the ground.

What a sight it must be to see a number of these queer looking birds at
work getting their food. If they happen to be in a swampy place, they
often find earthworms by simply turning over the dead leaves.

If there should be, near by, a field that has been newly plowed, they
will gather in numbers, at twilight, and search for worms.

The Woodcock has short wings for his size. He seems to be able to fly
very fast. You can imagine how he looks while flying--his long bill out
in front and his legs hanging down.




THE AMERICAN SCOTER.


The specimen we give of the American Scoter is one of unusual rarity and
beauty of plumage. It was seen off the government pier, in Chicago, in
November, 1895, and has been much admired.

The Scoter has as many names as characteristics, being called the Sea
Coot, the Butter-billed, and the Hollow-billed Coot. The plumage of the
full grown male is entirely black, while the female is a sooty brown,
becoming paler below. She is also somewhat smaller.

This Duck is sometimes found in great numbers along the entire Atlantic
coast where it feeds on small shell fish which it secures by diving. A
few nest in Labrador, and in winter it is found in New Jersey, on the
Great Lakes, and in California. The neighborhoods of marshes and ponds
are its haunts, and in the Hudson Bay region the Scoter nests in June
and July.

The nest is built on the ground near water. Coarse grass, feathers, and
down are commonly used to make it comfortable, while it is well secreted
in hollows in steep banks and cliffs. The eggs are from six to ten, of a
dull buff color.

Prof. Cooke states that on May 2, 1883, fifty of these ducks were seen
at Anna, Union county, Illinois, all busily engaged in picking up millet
seed that had just been sown. If no mistake of identification was made
in this case, the observation apparently reveals a new fact in the
habits of the species, which has been supposed to feed exclusively in
the water, and to subsist generally on fishes and other aquatic animal
food.

 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                WHITE-WINGED SCOTER.]




OLD ABE.

"I'd rather capture Old Abe," said Gen. Sterling Price, of the
Confederate Army, "than a whole brigade."


"Old Abe" was the live war Eagle which accompanied the Eighth Wisconsin
regiment during the War of the Rebellion. Much of a more or less
problematical character has been written about him, but what we regard
as authentic we shall present in this article. Old Abe was a fine
specimen of the Bald Eagle, very like the one figured in this number of
BIRDS. Various stories are told of his capture, but the most trustworthy
account is that Chief Sky, a Chippewa Indian, took him from the nest
while an Eaglet. The nest was found on a pine tree in the Chippewa
country, about three miles from the mouth of the Flambeau, near some
rapids in the river. He and another Indian cut the tree down, and, amid
the menaces of the parent birds, secured two young Eagles about the size
of Prairie Hens. One of them died. The other, which lived to become
historical, was sold to Daniel McCann for a bushel of corn. McCann
carried it to Eau Claire, and presented it to a company then being
organized as a part of the Eighth Wisconsin Infantry.

What more appropriate emblem than the American Bald-headed Bird could
have been thus selected by the patriots who composed this regiment of
freemen! The Golden Eagle (of which we shall hereafter present a
splendid specimen,) with extended wings, was the ensign of the Persian
monarchs, long before it was adopted by the Romans. And the Persians
borrowed the symbol from the Assyrians. In fact, the symbolical use of
the Eagle is of very remote antiquity. It was the insignia of Egypt, of
the Etruscans, was the sacred bird of the Hindoos, and of the Greeks,
who connected him with Zeus, their supreme deity. With the Scandinavians
the Eagle is the bird of wisdom. The double-headed Eagle was in use
among the Byzantine emperors, "to indicate their claims to the empire of
both the east and the west." It was adopted in the 14th century by the
German emperors. The arms of Prussia were distinguished by the Black
Eagle, and those of Poland by the White. The great Napoleon adopted it
as the emblem of Imperial France.

Old Abe was called by the soldiers the "new recruit from Chippewa," and
sworn into the service of the United States by encircling his neck with
red, white, and blue ribbons, and by placing on his breast a rosette of
colors, after which he was carried by the regiment into every engagement
in which it participated, perched upon a shield in the shape of a heart.
A few inches above the shield was a grooved crosspiece for the Eagle to
rest upon, on either end of which were three arrows. When in line Old
Abe was always carried on the left of the color bearer, in the van of
the regiment. The color bearer wore a belt to which was attached a
socket for the end of the staff, which was about five feet in length.
Thus the Eagle was high above the bearer's head, in plain sight of the
column. A ring of leather was fastened to one of the Eagle's legs to
which was connected a strong hemp cord about twenty feet long.

Old Abe was the hero of about twenty-five battles, and as many
skirmishes. Remarkable as it may appear, not one bearer of the flag, or
of the Eagle, always shining marks for the enemy's rifles, was ever shot
down. Once or twice Old Abe suffered the loss of a few feathers, but he
was never wounded.

The great bird enjoyed the excitement of carnage. In battle he flapped
his wings, his eyes blazed, and with piercing screams, which arose above
the noise of the conflict, seemed to urge the company on to deeds of
valor.

David McLane, who was the first color bearer to carry him into battle,
said:

"Old Abe, like all old soldiers, seemed to dread the sound of musketry
but with the roll of artillery he appeared to be in his glory. Then he
screamed, spread his wings at every discharge, and reveled in the roar
and smoke of the big guns." A correspondent who watched him closely said
that when a battle had fairly begun Old Abe jumped up and down on his
perch with such wild and fearful screams as an eagle alone can utter.
The louder the battle, the fiercer and wilder were his screams.

Old Abe varied his voice in accord with his emotions. When surprised he
whistled a wild melody of a melancholy softness; when hovering over his
food he gave a spiteful chuckle; when pleased to see an old friend he
seemed to say: "How do you do?" with a plaintive cooing. In battle his
scream was wild and commanding, a succession of five or six notes with a
startling trill that was inspiring to the soldiers. Strangers could not
approach or touch him with safety, though members of the regiment who
treated him with kindness were cordially recognized by him. Old Abe had
his particular friends, as well as some whom he regarded as his enemies.
There were men in the company whom he would not permit to approach him.
He would fly at and tear them with his beak and talons. But he would
never fight his bearer. He knew his own regiment from every other, would
always accompany its cheer, and never that of any other regiment.

Old Abe more than once escaped, but was always lured by food to return.
He never seemed disposed to depart to the blue empyrean, his ancestral
home.

Having served three years, a portion of the members of Company C were
mustered out, and Old Abe was presented to the state of Wisconsin. For
many years, on occasions of public exercise or review, like other
illustrious veterans, he excited in parade universal and enthusiastic
attention.

He occupied pleasant quarters in the State Capitol at Madison,
Wisconsin, until his death at an advanced age.




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                SNOWY HERON OR LITTLE EGRET.
                CHICAGO COLORTYPE CO.]

THE SNOWY HERON.

    "What does it cost this garniture of death?
      It costs the life which God alone can give;
    It costs dull silence where was music's breath,
      It costs dead joy, that foolish pride may live.
    Ah, life, and joy, and song, depend upon it,
    Are costly trimmings for a woman's bonnet!"
                                   --MAY RILEY SMITH.


Temperate and tropical America, from Long Island to Oregon, south to
Buenos Ayres, may be considered the home of the Snowy Heron, though it
is sometimes seen on the Atlantic coast as far as Nova Scotia. It is
supposed to be an occasional summer resident as far north as Long
Island, and it is found along the entire gulf coast and the shores of
both oceans. It is called the Little White Egret, and is no doubt the
handsomest bird of the tribe. It is pure white, with a crest composed of
many long hair-like feathers, a like plume on the lower neck, and the
same on the back, which are recurved when perfect.

Snowy Herons nest in colonies, preferring willow bushes in the marshes
for this purpose. The nest is made in the latter part of April or early
June. Along the gulf coast of Florida, they nest on the Mangrove
Islands, and in the interior in the willow ponds and swamps, in company
with the Louisiana and Little Blue Herons. The nest is simply a platform
of sticks, and from two to five eggs are laid.

Alas, plume hunters have wrought such destruction to these lovely birds
that very few are now found in the old nesting places. About 1889,
according to Mr. F. M. Woodruff, this bird was almost completely
exterminated in Florida, the plume hunters transferring their base of
operation to the Texas coast of the Gulf, and the bird is now in a fair
way to be utterly destroyed there also. He found them very rare in 1891
at Matagorda Bay, Texas. This particular specimen is a remarkably fine
one, from the fact that it has fifty-two plumes, the ordinary number
being from thirty to forty.

Nothing for some time has been more commonly seen than the delicate airy
plumes which stand upright in ladies' bonnets. These little feathers,
says a recent writer, were provided by nature as the nuptial adornment
of the White Heron. Many kind-hearted women who would not on any account
do a cruel act, are, by following this fashion, causing the continuance
of a great cruelty. If ladies who are seemingly so indifferent to the
inhumanity practiced by those who provide them with this means of
adornment would apply to the Humane Education Committee, Providence,
R. I., for information on the subject, they would themselves be aroused
to the necessity of doing something towards the protection of our birds.
Much is, however, being done by good men and women to this end.

The Little Egret moves through the air with a noble and rapid flight. It
is curious to see it pass directly overhead. The head, body and legs are
held in line, stiff and immovable, and the gently waving wings carry the
bird along with a rapidity that seems the effect of magic.

An old name of this bird was Hern, or Hernshaw, from which was derived
the saying, "He does not know a Hawk from a Hernshaw." The last word has
been corrupted into "handsaw," rendering the proverb meaningless.




SUMMARY


Page 3.

#BALD EAGLE.#--_Haliæetus leucocephalus._ Other names: "White-headed
Eagle," "Bird of Washington," "Gray Eagle," "Sea Eagle." Dark brown.
Head, tail, and tail coverts white. Tarsus, naked. Young with little or
no white.

RANGE--North America, breeding throughout its range.

NEST--Generally in tall trees.

EGGS--Two or three, dull white.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 8.

#SEMI-PALMATED PLOVER.#--_Ægialitis semi-palmata._ Other names:
"American Ring Plover," "Ring Neck," "Beach Bird." Front, throat, ring
around neck, and entire under parts white; band of deep black across the
breast; upper parts ashy brown. Toes connected at base.

RANGE--North America in general, breeding in the Arctic and sub-arctic
districts, winters from the Gulf States to Brazil.

NEST--Depression in the ground, with lining of dry grass.

EGGS--Three or four; buffy white, spotted with chocolate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 11.

#MALLARD DUCK.#--_Anas boschas._ Other names: "Green-head," "Wild Duck."
Adult male, in fall, winter, and spring, beautifully colored; summer,
resembles female--sombre.

RANGE--Northern parts of Northern Hemisphere.

NEST--Of grasses, on the ground, usually near the water.

EGGS--Six to ten; pale green or bluish white.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 15.

#AMERICAN AVOCET.#--_Recurvirostra americana._ Other names: "White
Snipe," "Yelper," "Lawyer," "Scooper."

RANGE--Temperate North America.

NEST--A slight depression in the ground.

EGGS--Three or four; pale olive or buffy clay color, spotted with
chocolate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 20.

#CANVAS-BACK.#--_Aythya vallisneria._ Other names: "White-Back,"
"Bull-Neck," "Red-Headed Bull-Neck."

RANGE--North America. Breeds only in the interior, from northwestern
states to the Arctic circle; south in winter to Guatemala.

NEST--On the ground, in marshy lakesides.

EGGS--Six to ten; buffy white, with bluish tinge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 21.

#WOOD DUCK.#--_Aix sponsa._ Coloring varied; most beautiful of ducks.
Other names: "Summer Duck," "Bridal Duck," "Wood Widgeon," "Tree Duck."

RANGE--North America. Breeds from Florida to Hudson's Bay; winters
south.

NEST--Made of grasses, usually placed in a hole in tree or stump.

EGGS--Eight to fourteen; pale, buffy white.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 26.

#SNAKE BIRD.#--_Anhinga anhinga._ Other names: "Water Turkey," "Darter,"
"Water Crow," "Grecian Lady."

RANGE--Tropical and sub-tropical America.

NEST--Of sticks, lined with moss, rootlets, etc., in a bush or tree over
the water.

EGGS--Two to four; bluish white, with a chalky deposit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 30.

#AMERICAN WOODCOCK.#--_Philohela minor._ Other names: "Bog-sucker," "Mud
Snipe," "Blind Snipe."

RANGE--Eastern North America, breeding throughout its range.

NEST--Of dried leaves, on the ground.

EGGS--Four; buffy, spotted with shades of rufous.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 33.

#WHITE-WINGED SCOTER.#--_Oidemia deglandi._ Other names: "American
Velvet Scoter," "White-winged Coot," "Uncle Sam Coot."

RANGE--Northern North America; breeding in Labrador and the fur
countries; south in winter.

NEST--On the ground, beneath bushes.

EGGS--Six to ten; pale, dull buff.

       *       *       *       *       *

Page 38.

#SNOWY HERON.#--_Ardea candidissima._ Other names: "Little Egret,"
"White-crested Egret," "White Poke."

RANGE--Tropical and temperate America.

NEST--A platform of sticks, in bushes, over water.

EGGS--Three to five; pale, dull blue.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds, Illustrated by Color
Photography [July 1897], by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS, ILLUSTRATED [JULY 1897] ***

***** This file should be named 30523-8.txt or 30523-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/2/30523/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, some
images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
