The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Genera of Phyllomedusine Frogs (Anura
Hylidae), by William E. Duellman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Genera of Phyllomedusine Frogs (Anura Hylidae)

Author: William E. Duellman

Release Date: February 8, 2010 [EBook #31221]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHYLLOMEDUSINE FROGS (ANURA HYLIDAE) ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph R. Hauser, Joseph Cooper
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY


Volume 18, No. 1, pp. 1-10 September 24, 1968




The Genera of Phyllomedusine Frogs (Anura: Hylidae)

BY

WILLIAM E. DUELLMAN




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS LAWRENCE 1968

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors of this number: Frank B. Cross, Philip S. Humphrey, J. Knox
Jones, Jr.


Volume 18, No. 1, pp. 1-10 Published September 24, 1968




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS Lawrence, Kansas




PRINTED BY ROBERT R. (BOB) SANDERS, STATE PRINTER TOPEKA, KANSAS 1968

32-3687




The Genera of Phyllomedusine Frogs (Anura: Hylidae)

BY

WILLIAM E. DUELLMAN


One of the most distinctive phyletic lines among the diverse Neotropical
hylid frogs is composed of a group of 40 species placed in the genus
_Phyllomedusa_ (Funkhouser, 1957) or in two or three different genera
(Goin, 1961; Lutz, 1966). These species differ from all other
Neotropical hylids by possessing a vertical, instead of horizontal,
pupil. The only other hylids having a vertical pupil belong to the
Papuan genus _Nyctimystes_. Goin (1961) erroneously stated that
_Nyctimantis_ and _Triprion_ have vertical pupils.

Although limited information is available on the cytotaxonomy of hylids,
the data show that phyllomedusine species have _n_=13 (2_n_=26)
chromosomes. _Acris_ has _n_=11 (2_n_=22) (Cole, 1966). Members of the
_Hyla leucophyllata_, _microcephala_, and _parviceps_ groups have _n_=15
(2_n_=30), _Gastrotheca ceratophrys_ has a haploid number of 14, the
Papuan hylid genus _Nyctimystes_ and all but one of the Australo-Papuan
_Hyla_ for which the numbers are known have a haploid number of 13, and
all other New World hylids studied have _n_=12 (2_n_=24) (Duellman and
Cole, 1965; Duellman, 1967).

Cei (1963) and Cei and Erspamer (1966) noted that phyllomedusine frogs
differ notably from other Neotropical hylids on the basis of the amines
and polypeptides in the skin. All species of phyllomedusines deposit
their eggs in a gelatinous mass on leaves or branches above water.
Although this type of egg deposition is characteristic of some
rhacophorines and apparently all centrolenids, it is known among hylids
only in the phyllomedusines and in two species of _Hyla_.

The distinctive combination of morphological, physiological,
chromosomal, and behavioral characteristics is strongly suggestive that
these frogs represent an early phyletic divergence within the Hylidae.
Günther (1859) proposed the familial name Phyllomedusidae for
_Phyllomedusa bicolor_ (Boddaert). I suggest the recognition of the
group as a subfamily. The following classification of the
phyllomedusines is based on my own knowledge of the Middle American and
some South American species and on evidence from the literature on those
South American species with which I am not personally familiar.


Subfamily Phyllomedusinae Günther, 1859

     Phyllomedusidae Günther 1859 [Type genus, _Phyllomedusa_ Wagler,
     1830].

_Definition._--Moderately small to large hylids having vertical pupils,
_n_=13 (2_n_=26) chromosomes, skin containing large amounts of
powerful bradykinin-like and physalaemin-like polypeptides, eggs
suspended from vegetation above water, and tadpoles have a ventral
spiracle sinistral to midline.

_Range._--Low and moderate elevations in South and Middle America,
including Trinidad, from northern Argentina and northwestern Ecuador to
Veracruz and southern Sonora, México.

_Content._--Three genera, one of which probably is composite.


Genus =Agalychnis= Cope, 1864.

_Agalychnis_ Cope, 1864 [Type species, _Hyla moreletii_ Duméril, 1853,
by subsequent designation].

_Definition._--Fingers and toes at least half webbed; terminal discs
large; first toe shorter than second and not opposable to others; skin
smooth, lacking osteoderms; parotoid glands, if present, poorly
developed and diffuse; palpebral membrane reticulate (except in _A.
calcarifer_); iris red or yellow; skull shallow, depth less than 40 per
cent of length; nasals large; frontoparietal fontanelle large;
quadratojugals reduced; prevomerine teeth present.

_Range._--Central Veracruz and northern Oaxaca, México, southeastward
through Central America to northwestern Ecuador; one species disjunct in
Amazonian Ecuador.

_Content._--Eight species [synonyms in brackets]: _annae_ (Duellman,
1963); _calcarifer_ Boulenger, 1902; _callidryas_ (Cope, 1862)
[_helenae_ Cope, 1885; _callidryas taylori_ (Funkhouser, 1957)];
_craspedopus_ (Funkhouser, 1957); _litodryas_ (Duellman and Trueb,
1967); _moreleti_ (Duméril, 1853) [_holochroa_ (Salvin, 1861)];
_saltator_ Taylor, 1955; _spurrelli_ Boulenger, 1913.

_Remarks._--Savage and Heyer (1967) provided evidence that _A.
callidryas taylori_ (Funkhouser) and _A. helenae_ Cope were junior
synonyms of _A. callidryas_ (Cope).


Genus =Pachymedusa=, new genus

Type species, _Agalychnis dacnicolor_ Cope, 1864.

_Definition._--Fingers and toes having basal webs and lateral fringes;
terminal discs large; first toe shorter than second and not opposable to
others; skin smooth or shagreened, lacking osteoderms; paratoid glands
present, diffuse; palpebral membrane reticulate; iris golden yellow with
black reticulations; skull deep, depth more than 50 per cent of length;
nasals large; frontoparietal fontanelle moderately large; quadratojugal
robust; prevomerine teeth present.

_Range._--Pacific slopes and lowlands from southern Sonora to the
Isthmus of Tehuantepec, México.

_Content._--Monotypic: _dacnicolor_ Cope, 1864 [_alcorni_ Taylor, 1952].

_Remarks._--The generic name is derived from the Greek _pachy_ meaning
thick and the Greek _Medousa_ (Latin, _Medusa_) in reference to
_Phyllomedusa_; the sense implied is the heavy body of _Pachymedusa
dacnicolor_.


Genus =Phyllomedusa= Wagler, 1830

_Phyllomedusa_ Wagler, 1830 [Type species, _Rana bicolor_ Boddaert,
1772].

_Pithecopus_ Cope, 1866 [Type species, _Phyllomedusa azurea_ Cope, 1862
(=_Phyllomedusa hypochondrialis_ Daudin, 1803), by original
designation].

_Hylomantis_ Peters, 1872 [Type species _Hylomantis aspera_ Peters,
1872, by monotypy].

_Phrynomedusa_ Miranda-Ribeiro, 1923 [Type species, _Phrynomedusa
fimbriata_ Miranda-Ribeiro, 1923, by subsequent designation].

_Bradymedusa_ Miranda-Ribeiro, 1926 [Type species, _Bradymedusa
moschada_ Miranda-Ribeiro, 1926 (=_Phyllomedusa rohdei_ Mertens, 1926)
by subsequent designation].

_Definition._--Fingers and toes having greatly reduced webbing or
lacking webs; terminal discs small; first toe shorter than, equal to, or
longer than second, opposable or not; skin smooth or rugose having
osteoderms or not; parotoid glands present, in most species, usually
distinct and elevated; palpebral membrane not reticulate; iris uniformly
silvery white to orange-bronze with black reticulations; skull moderate
to deep, depth more than 38 per cent of length; nasals moderately small;
frontoparietal fontanelle present, variable in size; quadratojugal
reduced in some species; prevomerine teeth present or absent.

_Range._--Low and moderate elevations in South America east of the Andes
from the Caribbean (including Trinidad) to northern Argentina; Costa
Rica and Panamá in Central America.

_Content._--Thirty-one species [synonyms in brackets]: _aspera_ (Peters,
1872); _ayeaye_ (B. Lutz, 1966); _bahiana_ A. Lutz, 1925; _bicolor_
(Boddaert, 1772) [_scleroderma_ Cope, 1868]; _blombergi_ Funkhouser,
1957; _boliviana_ Boulenger, 1902; _buckleyi_ Boulenger, 1882;
_burmeisteri burmeisteri_ Boulenger, 1882; _burmeisteri distincta_ B.
Lutz, 1950; _centralis_ Bokermann, 1965; _cochranae_ Bokermann, 1966;
_coelestis_ (Cope, 1874); _edentula_ Andersson, 1945; _feltoni_ Shreve,
1935; _fimbriata_ (Miranda-Ribeiro, 1923) [_appendiculata_ A. Lutz,
1925]; _guttata_ A. Lutz, 1925; _hypochondrialis_ (Daudin, 1803)
[_azurea_ Cope, 1862; _megacephala_ (Miranda-Ribeiro, 1926)]; _iheringi_
Boulenger, 1885; _lemur_ Boulenger, 1882; _loris_ Boulenger, 1912;
_medinae_ Funkhouser, 1962; _nicefori_ Barbour, 1926; _orcesi_
Funkhouser, 1957; _pailona_ Shreve, 1959; _perlata_ Boulenger, 1882;
_rohdei_ Mertens, 1926 [_moschada_ (Miranda-Ribeiro, 1926)]; _sauvagei_
Boulenger, 1882 [_rickettsii_ Günther, 1897]; _tarsius_ (Cope, 1868);
_tomopterna_ (Cope, 1868) [_palliata_ Peters, 1872]; _trinitatis_
Mertens, 1926, _vaillanti_ Boulenger, 1882, _venusta_ Duellmann and
Trueb, 1967.

_Remarks._--_Phyllomedusa_ includes 1) a series of large species
(_bicolor-burmeisteri_) showing progressive specialization of the feet;
2) a series of small species having grasping feet (_ayeaye_,
_centralis_, _cochranae_, _guttata_, _hypochondrialis_, and _rohdei_);
3) a series of small, relatively unspecialized species (_lemur_,
_loris_, and _medinae_); and 4) several other species of questionable
affinities. Lutz (1966) resurrected Cope's (1866) _Pithecopus_ for 12
species (_ayeaye_, _boliviana_, _burmeisteri_, _coelestis_,
_hypochondrialis_, _nicefori_, _rohdei_, _sauvagei_, _tarsius_,
_tomopterna_, _trinitatis_, and _vaillanti_). Adequate material is not
available for detailed study of all South American species;
consequently, a firm classification cannot be established at this time.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that Lutz's arrangement is unnatural. If
subsequent investigations show, as seems likely, that the small
specialized phyllomedusines are a natural phyletic unit, the generic
name _Pithecopus_ is available. However, species such as _boliviana_,
_burmeisteri_, _nicefori_, and _trinitatis_ do not belong in
_Pithecopus_. As noted by Funkhouser (1962), the small, relatively
unspecialized species (_lemur_, _loris_, and _medinae_) form a natural
group; possibly this group should be accorded generic recognition. Until
more evidence on the interspecific relationships is acquired, the
maintenance of the current classification is desirable.


DISCUSSION

Noble (1931) considered the species of _Phyllomedusa_ having opposable
digits, reduced terminal discs, and no webbing to be advanced and such
species as _Agalychnis moreleti_, _calcarifer_, and _spurrelli_ to be
primitive. Funkhouser (1957) followed Noble's suggestion and attempted
to explain the evolution of the species of _Phyllomedusa_ (_sensu lato_)
by assuming that they evolved from an advanced _Hyla_-like ancestor.
Therefore, she placed those species having large, fully webbed hands and
feet near the base of her phylogenetic scheme and hypothesized that
evolutionary sequences involved stages of reduction and eventual loss of
webbing, followed by the development of grasping toes. Such an
evolutionary history is highly unlikely. The _Agalychnis_ phyletic line
has one kind of specialization for an arboreal existence. It is contrary
to evolutionary theory that a specialized group would evolve into a
generalized form and then evolve new kinds of specializations to meet
the needs imposed by the same environmental conditions affecting the
earlier specialized group. A more reasonable hypothesis is that the
evolution of opposable digits took place in a phyletic line that had as
its ancestral stock a frog with generalized hands and feet. If this
assumption is correct, _Phyllomedusa_ and _Agalychnis_ represent
different phyletic lines; each exhibits divergent modes of adaptation
for arboreal habits, whereas _Pachymedusa_ probably remains relatively
little changed from the basic phyllomedusine stock.

On the basis of modern distribution and areas of diversification alone
(no fossils are known), it is evident that _Phyllomedusa_ underwent its
adaptive radiation in South America, _Agalychnis_ evolved in Central
America, and _Pachymedusa_ ended up in western México. If we follow the
Matthewsian concepts of the American herpetofauna outlined by Dunn
(1931) and modified by Schmidt (1943) and Stuart (1950), _Pachymedusa_
represents a "hanging-relict" of a group that moved southward. According
to Savage's (1966) interpretation of the origins and history of the
American herpetofauna, _Agalychnis_ and _Pachymedusa_ are members of the
Mesoamerican fauna, and _Phyllomedusa_ is part of the Neotropical fauna.
Perhaps the phyllomedusines arose in South America; from there a
primitive stock spread northward and survived as _Pachymedusa_ in
México, whereas the stock in Central America and South America evolved
into _Agalychnis_ and _Phyllomedusa_, respectively.

Evidently the primitive phyllomedusines evolved the habit of arboreal
egg deposition and a walking gait; the latter is best developed in the
small, highly specialized species of _Phyllomedusa_ (Lutz, 1966).
Probably the other divergent arboreal adaptations resulted from
environmental stresses and competition. The generalized _Pachymedusa_
inhabits relatively dry areas characterized by low forest. Throughout
its range it coexists with no more than five other arboreal hylids. The
species of _Agalychnis_ live in rain forests and humid montane forests.
In any given area one species of _Agalychnis_ occurs sympatrically with
no more than a dozen other arboreal hylids. With few exceptions the
species of _Agalychnis_ are more arboreal in their habits than are other
hylids. The species of _Phyllomedusa_ live in the same kinds of habitats
as do those of _Agalychnis_, but throughout the ranges of most of the
species of _Phyllomedusa_ the diversity of arboreal hylids is much
greater than in Central America. In the upper Amazon Basin as many as 35
hylids occur sympatrically. Many groups of _Hyla_ in this area (for
example, the _Hyla boans_ and _Hyla marmorata_ groups) are equally as
arboreal in their habits as are the species of _Agalychnis_ in Central
America. Conceivably, competition within this array of tree frogs
resulted in selection for modification of the extremities, thereby
bringing about a different mode of climbing in _Phyllomedusa_. The
walking gait already present in phyllomedusines provided a source for
further modification, which resulted in the development of opposable
digits and the associated lemuroid manner of climbing.

The known life histories of most species of _Phyllomedusa_, all species
of _Agalychnis_, and that of _Pachymedusa_ are similar.
Characteristically the tadpoles are generalized pelagic types that
develop in ponds, but at least some of the small specialized
_Phyllomedusa_ in southeastern Brazil have stream-adapted tadpoles with
funnel-shaped mouths (Cochran, 1955; Bokermann, 1966). Knowledge of the
life histories of the other species of _Phyllomedusa_ should aid in the
interpretation of the phylogenetic relationships of the several groups
of frogs now assigned to that genus.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to Linda Trueb who provided the osteological data
included, and who helped me in formulating some of the ideas expressed
in the discussion. This paper is a result of investigations on hylid
frogs supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF-GB-5818).


LITERATURE CITED

BOKERMANN, W. C. A
     1966. A new _Phyllomedusa_ from southeastern Brazil. Herpetologica,
           22:293-297.

CEI, J. M
     1963. Some precipitin tests and preliminary remarks on the
           systematic relationships of four South American families of
           frogs. Bull. Serological Mus., 30:4-6.

CEI, J. M. and V. ERSPAMER
     1966. Biochemical taxonomy of South American amphibians by means of
           skin amines and polypeptides. Copeia, no. 1:74-8.

COCHRAN, D. M
     1955. Frogs of southeastern Brazil. Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus., 206;
           xvi + 423 pp.

COLE, C. J
     1966. The chromosomes of _Acris crepitans blanchardi_ Harper
           (Anura: Hylidae). Copeia, no. 3:578-580.

COPE, E. D
     1864. Contributions to the herpetology of tropical America. Proc.
           Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 16:166-181. 1866. On the
           structures and distribution of the genera of arciferous
           Anura. Jour. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, ser. 2, 6:67-112.

DUELLMAN, W. E
     1967. Additional studies on chromosomes of anuran amphibians. Syst.
           Zool., 16:38-43.

DUELLMAN, W. E. and C. J. COLE
     1965. Studies of chromosomes of some anuran amphibians (Hylidae and
           Centrolenidae). Syst. Zool., 14:139-143.

DUMÉRIL, A. H
     1853. Memoire sur les batraciens anoures de la famille des
           hylaeformes ou rainettes comprenant la description d'un genre
           nouveau et de onze espèces nouvelles. Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 3,
           19:135-179.

DUNN, E. R
     1931. The herpetological fauna of the Americas. Copeia, no.
           3:106-119.

FUNKHOUSER, A
     1957. A review of the Neotropical tree-frogs of the genus
           _Phyllomedusa_. Occas. Papers Nat. Hist. Mus., Stanford
           Univ., 5:1-90. 1962. A new _Phyllomedusa_ from Venezuela.
           Copeia, no. 3:588-590.

GOIN, C. J
     1961. Synopsis of the genera of hylid frogs. Ann. Carnegie Mus.,
           36:5-18.

GÜNTHER, A. C. L. G.
     "1858" [1859], Catalogue of die Batrachia Salientia in the
           collection of the British Museum. Taylor and Francis, London,
           xvi + 160 pp., 12 pls.

LUTZ, B
     1966. _Pithecopus ayeaye_, a new Brazilian hylid with vertical
           pupils and grasping feet. Copeia, no. 2:236-240.

MIRANDA-RIBEIRO, A. DE
     1923. As Phyllomedusas do Museu Paulista. Bol. Mus. Nac, Rio de
           Janeiro, 1:3-6. 1926. Notas para servirem ao estudo dos
           gymnobatrachios (Anura) brasileiros. Arch Mus. Nac., Rio de
           Janeiro, 27:1-227, pls. 1-22.

NOBLE, G. K
     1931. The biology of the Amphibia. McGraw-Hill, New York, 577 pp.

PETERS, W. C. H
     1872. Über eine, zwei neue Gattungen enthaltende, Sammlung von
           Batrachiern des Hrn. Dr. O. Wucherer aus Bahia, so wie
           übereinige neue oder weniger bekannte Saurier. Monatsb. Akad.
           Wiss. Berlin, 1872:768-776.

SAVAGE, J. M
     1966. The origins and history of the Central American herpetofauna.
           Copeia, no. 4:719-766.

SAVAGE, J. M. and W. R. HEYER
     1967. Variation and distribution in the tree-frog genus
           _Phyllomedusa_ in Costa Rica, Central America. Beitr.
           Neotrop. Fauna, 5:111-131.

SCHMIDT, K. P
     1943. Corollary and commentary for "Climate and Evolution." Amer.
           Midl. Nat., 30:241-253.

STUART, L. C
     1950. A geographic study of the herpetofauna of Alta Verapaz,
           Guatemala. Contr. Lab. Vert. Biol., Univ. Michigan, 45:1-77,
           pls. 1-9.

WAGLER, J. G
     1830. Näturliches System der Amphibien, mit vorangehender
           Classification der Saügethiere und Vögel. München,
           vi + 354 pp., 9 pls.


_Transmitted April 18, 1968._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Genera of Phyllomedusine Frogs
(Anura Hylidae), by William E. Duellman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHYLLOMEDUSINE FROGS (ANURA HYLIDAE) ***

***** This file should be named 31221-8.txt or 31221-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/2/31221/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph R. Hauser, Joseph Cooper
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
