Project Gutenberg's Fifty-Two Sunday Dinners, by Elizabeth O. Hiller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fifty-Two Sunday Dinners
       A Book of Recipes

Author: Elizabeth O. Hiller

Release Date: March 7, 2010 [EBook #31534]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY-TWO SUNDAY DINNERS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note: Please note that this book was published decades ago
and nutritional opinion has changed in some ways. In particular, people
are now generally advised not to eat raw eggs. Please use caution when
following these recipes.


[Illustration: Cover]




          _Fifty-Two_
          SUNDAY
          DINNERS

          _A Book
          of Recipes_


          Arranged on a unique plan, combining helpful
          suggestions for appetizing, well-balanced menus,
          with all the newest ideas and latest discoveries
          in the preparation of tasty, wholesome cookery

[Illustration]

          _Written and Compiled by_

          MRS. ELIZABETH O. HILLER

          Founder and Principal of the Chicago Domestic
          Science School, and a noted writer and
          lecturer on culinary subjects


          _Published by_

          THE N. K. FAIRBANK COMPANY

          CHICAGO      NEW YORK      ST. LOUIS
          NEW ORLEANS      MONTREAL


          Copyrighted 1913, by The N. K. Fairbank Company


          _And the passage of years shall not dim in the least
          The glory and joy of our Sabbath-day feast._
                                              --_Eugene Field_


          PRICE, $1.00




INTRODUCTION


TO the modern wide-awake, twentieth-century woman efficiency in
household matters is quite as much a problem as efficiency in business
is to the captains of industry.

How to make pure food, better food and to economize on the cost of same
is just now taxing the attention and ingenuity of domestic science
teachers and food experts generally. The average housewife is intensely
interested in the result of these findings, and must keep in touch with
them to keep up with the times and run her home in an intelligent and
economical as well as healthful routine.

The eternal feminine question is, "What shall we have for dinner
to-day?" It is not always the easiest thing in the world to think of a
seasonable menu, nor to determine just the right combination that will
furnish a meal appetizing and well-balanced in food values. Furthermore,
both the expense and the amount of work entailed in preparation must be
considered.

This Cook Book is especially designed to meet just that pressing daily
need of the housewife. It presents for her guidance a menu for every
Sunday dinner in the year; it suggests dishes which are seasonable as
well as practical; it tells in a simple, intelligent manner just how
these dishes can be made in the most wholesome and economical form; and
the recipes have all been especially made for this book and tested by
that eminent expert, Mrs. Elizabeth O. Hiller.

The title of "52 Sunday Dinners" has been given the book because Sunday
dinners as a rule are a little more elaborate than the other dinners of
the week, but from these menus may be gleaned helpful hints for daily
use.

While climatic conditions differ somewhat in various sections of the
country, we have tried to approximate the general average, so that the
suggestions might be as valuable to the housewife in New England as to
the housewife in the West or South, or vice versa.

Simplicity, economy and wholesomeness have been given preferred
attention in the preparation of these recipes, many of which are here
presented for the first time.

In the interest of health and economy a number of the recipes suggest
the use of Cottolene--a frying and shortening medium of unquestioned
purity--in place of butter or lard. Cottolene is a vegetable shortening,
pure in source and manufactured amid cleanly favorable surroundings. It
is no new, untried experiment, having been used by domestic science
experts and thousands of housewives for nearly twenty years; to them
Cottolene for shortening and frying is "equal to butter at half the
price, better and more healthful than lard--and more economical than
either." We, therefore, offer no apologies for the small proportion of
recipes specifying the use of Cottolene, and suggest that a trial will
convince any housewife that Cottolene makes better food than either
butter or lard, and is preferable from the standpoints of efficiency,
economy and healthfulness.

We commend this book to your critical inspection and test, believing you
will find it convenient, helpful, unique and pointing the way to better
and more economical living.

          THE N. K. FAIRBANK COMPANY.




For All Shortening and Frying Use COTTOLENE


YEARS ago nothing but butter or lard were used for shortening and
frying; to-day the visible supply of these two products is insufficient
to supply the demand, taking into consideration the amount of butter
required for table use. Furthermore, as the demand increased it outgrew
the supply of butter and lard, with the result that prices were
materially advanced; and, incidentally, the quality has been lowered.
Naturally, under such conditions scores of substitutes have been offered
as shortening and frying mediums--some meritorious, but mostly inferior.

Cottolene is not offered the housewife as a cheap imitation of either
butter or lard, but as a vegetable product which is superior to either
for cooking purposes. Because it happens to be about half the price of
butter, or less, is but an additional reason, from a purely economical
standpoint, for its use. The main argument for the use of Cottolene is
the purity of its ingredients and the wholesomeness of the food prepared
with it.

There isn't an ounce of hog fat in Cottolene, and from cottonfield to
kitchen human hands never touch the product. It is pure and absolutely
free from taint or contamination from source to consumer. Packed in our
patent, air-tight tin pails, Cottolene reaches you as fresh as the day
it was made. Lard and butter are sold in bulk, and do not have this
protection.

Cottolene is always uniform in quality, and because of its freedom from
moisture it goes one-third farther than butter or lard, both of which
contain about 20% of water. It is much more economical than lard; about
50% more so than butter.

Cottolene contains no salt, and is richer in shortening properties than
either butter or lard. Two-thirds of a pound of Cottolene will give
better results than a pound of either butter or lard.

Because Cottolene is made from sweet and pure oils, refined by our own
special process, it makes food more digestible. Its use insures light,
flaky pie-crust; it makes deliciously crisp, tender doughnuts; for
cake-making it creams up beautifully and gives results equal to the best
cooking butter; muffins, fritters, shortcake and all other pastry are
best when made with Cottolene; it makes food light and rich, but never
greasy. Cottolene heats to a higher temperature than butter or lard, and
cooks so quickly the fat has no chance to soak in.

You can fry fish in Cottolene and use the remaining fat for frying
potatoes or other food. The odor of fish will not be imparted to the
other food fried in the fat. Cottolene is just as pure and healthful as
olive oil, and is unqualifiedly recommended by leading physicians,
domestic science authorities and culinary experts as wholesome,
digestible and economical. The use of Cottolene in your frying and
shortening will both save you money and give you better results.




HOW TO USE COTTOLENE


The General Care of Cottolene

Exercise the same care and judgment with Cottolene as you would with
butter, lard or olive oil; keep it in a moderately cool place when not
in use, just as you would butter--so that its best qualities may be
preserved.

Moreover, just because you occasionally buy strong butter or rancid lard
which your grocer has kept in too warm a place, you do not denounce all
butter or lard and give up their use; neither would it be fair to
condemn Cottolene simply because your grocer may not have kept it
properly. No fat will keep sweet indefinitely without proper care.


The Use of Cottolene for Shortening

Of course, the recipes in this book indicate the exact amount of
Cottolene to be used. In your other recipes, however, a general, _and
important_, rule for the use of Cottolene is:

=Use one-third less Cottolene than the amount of butter or lard given in
your recipe.=

For cake-baking, cream the Cottolene as you would butter, adding a
little salt; _Cottolene contains no salt_. For other pastry handle
exactly the same as directed for either butter or lard, using one-third
less.


The Use of Cottolene in Frying

In _saut√©ing_, _browning_ or "_shallow frying_" (as it is sometimes
called) use only enough Cottolene to grease the pan. The Cottolene
should be put into the pan _while cold_ and, after the bottom of the pan
is once covered with the melted Cottolene, more can be added as desired.
Add more fat when you turn the food.

Cottolene can be heated to a much higher temperature without burning
than either butter or lard, but--unless allowed to heat gradually--the
Cottolene may burn and throw out an odor, just as would any other
cooking-fat.

For _deep frying_, have Cottolene at least deep enough to cover, or
float, the article being fried, heating slowly. For uncooked mixtures,
such as doughnuts, fritters, etc., test with one-inch cubes of stale
bread. The cubes of bread should brown a golden brown in one minute; or
test with a bit of dough, which should rise at once to the top with some
sputtering. Make this test always,--never trust your eye. The fat should
be kept at an even temperature. For cooked mixtures, such as croquettes,
fish balls, etc., the cube of bread should brown a golden brown in 40
seconds.

Uncooked fish and meat are better when covered with bread crumbs, to
keep the crisp crust desired in frying food (see note on Egging and
Crumbing under Culinary Hints, Page 12). The fat should be hot at first,
that it may not penetrate; then reduce the heat, that the food may cook
till done, without burning.

Crumbed food is usually arranged in a croquette basket before placing it
in the hot fat. This prevents the food from moving about, which
sometimes causes the crust to loosen from the food, allowing it to
absorb the fat.

Never let the fat heat to smoking point, for then it is burning hot, and
the food will burn on the outside while the inside remains raw and
uncooked. Cook only three or four pieces at once, for more will chill
the fat and prevent perfect frying.

After the food has been cooked by this frying method it should be
carefully removed at once from the fat and drained on brown paper.


Care of Cottolene After Frying

After the frying is done, the fat should be allowed to stand in a cool
place to permit any sediment to settle. When cool, pour the fat
carefully through a double fold of cheesecloth, or through a fine
strainer. It is then ready for use.

Cottolene does not retain the taste or odor from any article whatever
that may be fried in it, and it may be used over and over again. You may
from time to time, add fresh Cottolene to it as your quantity
diminishes, but the frying qualities of the Cottolene are not affected
by the shrinkage of the fat.




What Noted Cooking Experts Think of Cottolene.


THE high regard in which Cottolene is held by all those who have made a
careful study of food preparation and food values is conclusively shown
by the following testimonials received from famous authorities on
Domestic Science:


Mrs. Sarah Tyson Rorer

Principal Philadelphia Cooking School and Culinary Editor "The Ladies'
Home Journal."

          "_I use Cottolene in every and all the ways that
          one would use lard, also in the preparation of
          sweet cakes. I consider it an important frying
          medium and a much more healthful product than
          lard._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Marion Harland

Author of the famous "Marion Harland Cook Book."

          "_Many years ago I discontinued the use of lard in
          my kitchen and substituted for it--as an
          experiment--Cottolene, then comparatively a new
          product. Since my first trial of it I can truly
          say that it has given complete satisfaction,
          whether it is used alone, as 'shortening,' or in
          combination with butter in pastry, biscuit, etc.,
          or in frying. I honestly believe it to be the very
          best thing of its kind ever offered to the
          American housekeeper._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Janet M. Hill

Editor "Boston Cooking School Magazine."

          "_For several years I have used Cottolene in my
          own kitchen and find it very satisfactory. I am
          glad to commend it._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Jennie Underwood


Superintendent The New York Cooking School.

          "_We have used Cottolene for some time in our
          classes here and are more than pleased with the
          results, all agreeing that it is a very valuable
          article. As a shortening agent in pastry, biscuit,
          etc., it has proved all that you claim for it, and
          as a frying agent it is entirely satisfactory._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Mary Arline Zurhorst

Principal National School Domestic Arts and Science, Washington, D. C.

          "_Not only have we found Cottolene invaluable as a
          frying agent, no matter how delicate the
          composition of the article to be cooked, but also
          as a substitute for the shortening in pastries and
          sweets it has no equal._"

       *       *       *       *       *

These are but a few. Other well known authorities who have tested
Cottolene and recommend its use are:

          Mrs. F. A. Benson
          Mrs. Emma P. Ewing
          and Mrs. Christine Terhune Herrick




Eminent Physicians Endorse the Wholesomeness of Cottolene


NINE-TENTHS of all human ailments are due primarily to indigestion or
are aggravated because of it. The chief cause of indigestion is food
prepared with lard. The following are but brief extracts from letters
received, showing the high esteem in which Cottolene is regarded as a
cooking medium by physicians ranking among the highest in the
profession.


J. Hobart Egbert, A. M., M. D., Ph. D.

From an article in the "Medical Summary," entitled, "Available Facts for
Consumptives and Others with Wasting Diseases."

          "_In cooking food, we would recommend the
          preparation known as 'Cottolene,' a wholesome
          combination of fresh beef suet and purest
          cottonseed oil. This preparation is both
          economical and convenient, free from adulteration
          and impurities, and dietetic experiments
          conclusively show that incorporated in food it
          yields to the body available nourishment._"

       *       *       *       *       *

R. Ogden Doremus, M. D., LL. D.

Professor of Chemistry, Toxicology and Medical Jurisprudence, Bellevue
Hospital Medical College, New York.

          "_As a substitute for lard, which is its purpose,
          Cottolene possesses all the desirable qualities of
          lard without having the objectionable features
          inherent in all products obtained from swine._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. James Page Emery

From an article in the "American Housekeeper" entitled "The Most
Healthful of All Cooking Fats."

          "_Cottolene, being essentially a vegetable
          product, forms the most healthful and nutritious
          cooking medium known to the food experts and
          medical profession._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Wm. Jago, F. I. C., F. C. S.

That eminent chemist, William Jago, than whom there is no higher
authority on cooking fats, reports as follows from Brighton, England:

          "_I find Cottolene to consist practically of 100
          per cent pure fat, the following being the actual
          results obtained by analysis: Percentage of Pure
          Fat, 99.982. I found the 'shortening' effect of 12
          ozs. of Cottolene practically equal to that of 1
          lb. best butter. For hygienic reasons, Cottolene
          may be used with safety as a perfectly harmless
          and innocuous substitute for other fats employed
          for dietetic purposes._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Other eminent physicians who have endorsed and recommended Cottolene
are: =Henry Seffmann, M.D.=, Professor of Chemistry, Woman's Medical
College of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; =Prof. Jesse P. Battershall,
Ph.S., F.C.S.=, Chemist U.S. Laboratory, New York; =Dr. Allen McLane
Hamilton=, New York, N.Y.; =Dr. Edw. Smith=, Analyst New York State
Board of Health.




HOW TO MEASURE


ONE cup, or one tablespoon, or one teaspoon, means a full measure--all
it will hold of liquid, and even with the rim, or edge, of dry material.
All measurements in this book are level unless otherwise stated, and
_the quantities indicated are designed for a family of six persons_.

Stir up all packed materials, like mustard in its box, and sift flour
before measuring. Fill cup without shaking down, and dip spoon in
material, taking up a heaped measure, then with a knife scrape off
toward the tip till you have level measure. Pack butter or Cottolene in
cup so there will be no air spaces. A scant cup means one-eighth less
and a heaped cup about one-eighth more than a level cup.

Divide a level spoon lengthwise for a half measure, and a half spoon
crosswise for quarters or eighths. A pinch means about one-eighth, so
does a saltspoon; less means a dash or a few grains.

A rounded tablespoon means filled above the rim as much as the spoon
hollow below, and equals two of level measure. It also equals one ounce
in weight, and two rounded tablespoons if put together would heap a
tablespoon about as high as would an egg, giving us the old-time measure
of "butter size of an egg," or two ounces, or one-fourth the cup.

Except in delicate cake, or where it is creamed with sugar, and in
pastry--where it should be chilled to make a flaky crust, COTTOLENE or
butter may be most quickly and economically measured after it is melted.
Keep a small supply in a granite cup, and when needed, stand the cup in
hot water, and when melted, pour the amount desired into the spoon or
cup. For all kinds of breakfast cakes, it is especially helpful to
measure it in this way.

Soda, baking powder, spices, etc., are generally measured with a
teaspoon, level measure, for this gives the proportional amount needed
for the cup measure of other materials.


STANDARD TABLE OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

(All measurements are made level)


Liquids

          60 drops                                  = 1 teaspoon
          3 teaspoons                               = 1 tablespoon
          1 tablespoon                              = 1/2 ounce
          4 tablespoons                             = 1/4 cup or 1/2 gill
          2 gills                                   = 1 cup
          2 cups                                    = 1 pint
          2 cups milk or water                      = 1 pound


Solids

          2 tablespoons flour                       = 1 ounce
          4 cups flour                              = 1 pound or 1 quart
          2 solid level cups of butter or Cottolene = 1 pound
          1/2 solid level cup butter                = 1/4 pound
          2 tablespoons granulated sugar            = 1 ounce
          2 cups granulated sugar                   = 1 pound
          2-1/2 cups powdered sugar                 = 1 pound
          2 solid cups chopped meat                 = 1 pound
          2 tablespoons butter (solid and level)    = 1 ounce
          4 tablespoons butter (solid and level)    = 1/4 cup
          4 tablespoons coffee                      = 1 ounce
          9 large eggs                              = 1 pound




Time Tables for Cooking


Baking Bread, Cakes and Puddings

          Loaf bread                        40 to 60 m.
          Rolls, Biscuit                    10 to 20 m.
          Graham gems                             30 m.
          Gingerbread                       20 to 30 m.
          Sponge-cake                       45 to 60 m.
          Plain cake                        30 to 40 m.
          Fruit cake                         2 to 3 hrs.
          Cookies                           10 to 15 m.
          Bread pudding                           1 hr.
          Rice and Tapioca                        1 hr.
          Indian pudding                     2 to 3 hrs.
          Plum pudding                       2 to 3 hrs.
          Custards                          15 to 20 m.
          Steamed brown-bread                    3 hrs.
          Steamed puddings                   1 to 3 hrs.
          Pie-crust                         about 30 m.
          Potatoes                          30 to 45 m.
          Baked beans                        6 to 8 hrs.
          Braised meat                       3 to 4 hrs.
          Scalloped dishes                  15 to 20 m.


Baking Meats

          Beef, sirloin, rare, per lb.            8 to 10 m.
          Beef, sirloin, well done, per lb.      12 to 15 m.
          Beef, rolled rib or rump, per lb.      12 to 15 m.
          Beef, long or short fillet             20 to 30 m.
          Mutton, rare, per lb.                        10 m.
          Mutton, well done, per lb.                   15 m.
          Lamb, well done, per lb.                     15 m.
          Veal, well done, per lb.                     20 m.
          Pork, well done, per lb.                     30 m.
          Turkey, 10 lbs. wt.                           3 hrs.
          Chickens, 3 to 4 lbs. wt.            1 to 1-1/2 hrs.
          Goose, 8 lbs.                                 2 hrs.
          Tame duck                              40 to 60 m.
          Game duck                              30 to 40 m.
          Grouse, Pigeons                              30 m.
          Small birds                            15 to 20 m.
          Venison, per lb.                             15 m.
          Fish, 6 to 8 lbs.; long, thin fish            1 hr.
          Fish, 4 to 6 lbs.; thick Halibut              1 hr.
          Fish, small                            20 to 30 m.


Freezing

          Ice Cream                               30 m.


Boiling

          Coffee                               3 to  5 m.
          Tea, steep without boiling                 5 m.
          Cornmeal                                   3 hrs.
          Hominy, fine                               1 hr.
          Oatmeal, rolled                           30 m.
          Oatmeal coarse, steamed                    3 hrs.
          Rice, steamed                       45 to 60 m.
          Rice, boiled                        15 to 20 m.
          Wheat Granules                      20 to 30 m.
          Eggs, soft boiled                    3 to  6 m.
          Eggs, hard boiled                   15 to 20 m.
          Fish, long, whole, per lb.           6 to 10 m.
          Fish, cubical, per lb.                    15 m.
          Clams, Oysters                       3 to  5 m.
          Beef, corned and √† la mode           3 to  5 hrs.
          Soup stock                           3 to  6 hrs.
          Veal, Mutton                         2 to  3 hrs.
          Tongue                               3 to  4 hrs.
          Potted pigeons                             2 hrs.
          Ham                                        5 hrs.
          Sweetbreads                         20 to 30 m.
          Sweet corn                           5 to  8 m.
          Asparagus, Tomatoes, Peas           15 to 20 m.
          Macaroni, Potatoes, Spinach,
            Squash, Celery, Cauliflower,
            Greens                            20 to 30 m.
          Cabbage, Beets, young               30 to 45 m.
          Parsnips, Turnips                   30 to 45 m.
          Carrots, Onions, Salsify            30 to 60 m.
          Beans, String and Shelled            1 to  2 hrs.
          Puddings, 1 quart, steamed                 3 hrs.
          Puddings, small                            1 hr.


Frying

          Croquettes, Fish Balls                   1 m.
          Doughnuts, Fritters                3 to  5 m.
          Bacon, Small Fish, Potatoes        2 to  5 m.
          Breaded Chops and Fish             5 to  8 m.


Broiling

          Steak, one inch thick                        4 m.
          Steak, one and a half inch thick             6 m.
          Small, thin fish                       5 to  8 m.
          Thick fish                            12 to 15 m.
          Chops broiled in paper                 8 to 10 m.
          Chickens                                    20 m.
          Liver, Tripe, Bacon                    3 to  8 m.




HELPFUL CULINARY HINTS


On Methods of Cooking

Water _boiling_ slowly has the same temperature as when boiling rapidly,
and will do just the same amount of work; there is, therefore, no object
in wasting fuel to keep water boiling violently.

_Stewing_ is the most economical method of cooking the cheaper and
tougher cuts of meats, fowl, etc. This method consists in cooking the
food a long time in sufficient water to cover it--at a temperature
slightly below the boiling point.

_Braising._ In this method of cooking, drippings or fat salt pork are
melted or tried out in the kettle and a bed of mixed vegetables, fine
herbs and seasoning placed therein. The article being cooked is placed
on this bed of vegetables, moisture is added and the meat cooked until
tender at a low temperature. The last half hour of cooking the cover is
removed, so that the meat may brown richly.

In _broiling_ and _grilling_, the object is first to sear the surface
over as quickly as possible, to retain the rich juices, then turn
constantly until the food is richly browned. _Pan-broiling_ is cooking
the article in a greased, hissing-hot, cast-iron skillet, turning often
and drawing off the fat as it dries out.

_Saut√©ing_ is practically the same as pan-broiling, except that the fat
is allowed to remain in the skillet. The article is cooked in a small
amount of fat, browning the food on one side and then turning and
browning on the other side.

_Frying._ While this term is sometimes used in the sense of saut√©ing it
usually consists of cooking by means of immersion in deep, hot fat. When
frying meats or fish it is best to keep them in a warm room a short time
before cooking, then wipe dry as possible. As soon as the food has
finished frying, it should be carefully removed from the fat and drained
on brown paper.


Egging and Crumbing Food

Use for this dry bread crumbs, grated and sifted, crackers rolled and
sifted, or soft stale bread broken in pieces and gently rubbed through
croquette basket; the eggs should be broken into a shallow plate and
slightly beaten with a fork to mix the white thoroughly. Dilute the eggs
in the proportion of two tablespoons cold milk or water to every egg.
The crumbs should be dusted on the board; the food to be fried should be
lightly crumbed all over, then dipped into egg so as to cover the
article entirely, then rolled again in bread crumbs. Sometimes, as in
cooking fish, flour is used for the first coating in place of the
crumbs, the article being then dipped into the egg mixture, then with
crumbs and then fried.


Larding

Consists of introducing small strips of fat, salt pork or bacon through
uncooked meat. To lard, introduce one end of the lardoon (the small
strip of fat) into a larding needle and with the pointed end take up a
stitch one-half inch deep and one-half inch wide. Draw the needle
through carefully so that the ends of the lardoon may project evenly
over the surface of the meat. Oftentimes, however, thin slices of fat,
salt pork or bacon are placed over the meat as a substitute for larding,
although it does not give quite the same delicious flavor or look so
attractive.


Marinating

Consists of adding a pickle, composed of vinegar and oil, to the
ingredients of some combination used in salad making.


Cleaning Cooking Utensils

For washing dishes and cleaning pots and pans use a solution made by
dissolving a teaspoonful or so of Gold Dust Washing Powder in a dish-pan
full of water. If the cooking utensils have become charred or stained in
cooking, sprinkle some Polly Prim Cleaner on a damp cloth and rub
utensil thoroughly. After scouring, rinse the article well in hot water,
and wipe dry. Use Polly Prim Cleaner also, for cleaning cutlery and for
keeping the refrigerator clean and sweet.




_January_

          _Hail! hail! the New Year, ring the bells
           Till music echoes o'er the dells,
           Play merry tunes, sing merry songs,
           For joy to this New Year belongs._
                                      --_Raymond._

[Illustration]

EDITOR'S NOTE:

_This menu--the first of the year--has been prepared rather more
elaborately than the customary Sunday menus, with the thought that it
might serve also as suggestion for a New Year's Dinner._

[Sidenote: _January_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTERS ON THE HALF SHELL

          MANGOES      SALTED NUTS      OLIVES

          CONSOMM√â DUCHESS--IMPERIAL STICKS

          CRAB MEAT IN TIMBALE CASES

          "GREEN" GOOSE ROASTED--POTATO AND NUT STUFFING

          CHANTILLY APPLE SAUCE

          ONIONS AU GRATIN

          ENDIVE, CELERY AND GREEN PEPPER SALAD

          VANILLA ICE CREAM--CHOCOLATE SAUCE

          COCOANUT CUBES--CHOCOLATE NUT CAKE

          FRUIT      RAISINS      NUTS

          ROQUEFORT CHEESE--WATER BISCUIT

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTERS ON THE HALF SHELL

          3 dozen oysters.
          2 lemons cut in quarters.
          Salt, pepper, Tobasco, horseradish and Tomato catsup.

PROCESS: If possible, have the little Blue Points. Open, loosen, and
leave them on the lower shell. Fill soup plates with shaved ice and
arrange shell on ice having the small end of shells point toward center
of the plate. Wash lemons, cut in quarters, remove seeds and serve
one-quarter in center of each plate. Garnish with sprays of parsley
arranged between the shells. Pass remaining ingredients on a small
silver tray, or a cocktail dressing may be made and served in a small
glass dish and passed to each guest.


CONSOMM√â DUCHESS

Consomm√© served with a meringue, prepared as follows: Beat the whites of
eggs very stiff and drop by heaping tablespoonsful into milk heated to
the scalding point in a shallow vessel (a dripping pan is the best),
using care that milk does not scorch. Turn each spoonful, allowing it to
cook, until it sets. Place one of these individual meringues on the top
of each service of consomm√©, and sprinkle with finely chopped parsley.
Serve with Imperial Sticks.


IMPERIAL STICKS

Cut stale bread in one-third inch slices, remove the crusts. Spread
thinly with butter. Cut slices in one-third inch strips, put on a tin
sheet and bake until a delicate brown in a hot oven. Pile "log cabin"
fashion on a plate covered with a doily, or serve two sticks on plate by
the side of cup in which soup is served.


CRAB MEAT IN TIMBALE CASES

          8 Timbale cases.
          2 cups crab meat.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          Yolks 2 eggs.
          1 tablespoon onion finely chopped.
          Salt, pepper, paprika.
          Few grains each cayenne, mustard and nutmeg.
          2 cups hot thin cream.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce pan, add onion and cook five minutes
without browning, stirring constantly. Add flour and stir until well
blended. Add hot cream gradually, continue stirring, add seasoning to
taste. Remove from range and add egg yolks slightly beaten. Reheat crab
meat in sauce (over hot water). Serve in Swedish Timbales.


SWEDISH TIMBALES

          1 cup flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon sugar.
          1 egg.
          2/3 cup milk.
          1 tablespoon olive oil.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and sugar, add milk slowly, stirring
constantly, add well beaten egg and olive oil. Mixture should be very
smooth, strain and let stand over night. Heat a timbale iron in hot
Cottolene, drain and dip iron into batter, (having batter in a small
pitcher), place in hot Cottolene and fry until crisp and delicately
browned. Remove from iron and invert on brown paper. These dainty cases
are for all kinds of creamed mixtures. They are used instead of patty
shells or croustades.


ROAST GOOSE

PREPARING THE GOOSE FOR THE OVEN

Singe, and remove all pin feathers. Before drawing the bird give it a
thorough scrubbing with a brush, in a warm Fairy soap solution. This is
very necessary for it cleans off all dirt that becomes mixed with the
oily secretions, and opens and cleanses the pores that the oil may be
more readily extracted. Draw and remove everything that can be taken
out, then rinse thoroughly and wipe inside and out, with a clean crash
towel; sprinkle the inside lightly with salt, pepper, and powdered sage.
(The latter may be omitted.)

Stuff with the following mixture and truss as turkey.


POTATO AND NUT STUFFING

(FOR ROAST GOOSE OR DUCK)

          4 cups hot mashed potatoes.
          2-1/2 tablespoons finely chopped onion or chives.
          1 cup English Walnut meats chopped moderately.
          1/2 teaspoon paprika.
          1-1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 cup cream.
          2 tablespoons butter.
          Yolks of 2 eggs.
          1 teaspoon sweet herbs if the flavor is desired.

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients in the order given and fill the body of the
goose.


ROASTING THE BIRD

After trussing, place the goose on a rack in a dripping pan, sprinkle
with salt, cover the breast with thin slices of fat salt pork, and place
in the oven. Cook three-quarters of an hour, basting often with the fat
in the pan. Then remove pan from oven and drain off all the fat. Remove
the slices of pork and sprinkle again with salt and dredge with flour
and return to oven. When the flour is delicately browned, add one cup of
boiling water and baste often; add more water when necessary. Sprinkle
lightly with salt and again dredge with flour. Cook until tender, from
one and one-half to three hours, according to the age of the bird. If
you have a very young goose it is infinitely better to steam or braise
it until tender, then dredge it with salt and flour and brown it richly
in the oven. Serve on a bed of cress, garnish with Baked Snow or
Jonathan apples.


CHANTILLY APPLE SAUCE (WITH HORSERADISH)

Pare, core and cut in quarters, five medium-sized Greenings. Cook with
very little water; when quite dry, rub through a fine pur√©e strainer. To
the pulp add one-half cup granulated sugar, five tablespoons grated
horseradish, then fold in an equal quantity of whipped cream. Serve at
once with roast goose, ducks or goslings.


ONIONS AU GRATIN

Cook one quart of uniform-sized, silver-skinned onions in boiling salted
water. When quite tender, drain and turn into a baking dish; cover with
Cream Sauce (see Page 151), sprinkle the top with fine buttered cracker
crumbs and finish cooking. Brown crumbs delicately.


ENDIVE, CELERY AND GREEN PEPPER SALAD

Select crisp, well-bleached heads of endive, separate the leaves,
keeping the green leaves separate from the bleached; wash and dry.
Dispose the leaves on individual plates of ample size. Arrange the green
leaves first, then the bleached leaves until a nest has been formed;
fill the centers with the hearts of celery cut in one-half inch pieces.
Cut a slice from the stem end of crisp red and green peppers, remove the
seeds and veins and cut in the thinnest shreds possible, using the
shears. Strew these shreds over each portion and, just before serving,
marinate each with French Dressing.


VANILLA ICE CREAM

          3/4 cup sugar.
          1/3 cup water.
          1 quart cream.
          1-1/2 tablespoons vanilla.

PROCESS: Make a syrup by boiling sugar and water three minutes. Cool
slightly and add to cream, add vanilla and freeze in the usual way. Pack
in a brick-shape mold. Bury in salt and ice, let stand several hours.
Remove from mold to serving platter and pour around each portion Hot
Chocolate Sauce.


HOT CHOCOLATE SAUCE

Melt two squares chocolate in a sauce-pan, add one cup sugar, one
tablespoon butter and two-thirds cup boiling water. Simmer fifteen
minutes. Cool slightly and add three-fourths teaspoon vanilla.


COCOANUT CUBES

Use recipe for Bride's Cake (see recipe on Page 175). Bake in a sheet.
When cool cut in two-inch cubes and cover each cube with Boiled
Frosting; sprinkle thickly with fresh grated cocoanut.


CHOCOLATE NUT CAKE

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          2 cups sugar.
          4 eggs.
          1 cup milk.
          2-1/3 cups flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          2 squares chocolate melted.
          3/4 cup English walnut meats broken in pieces.
          1/2 teaspoon vanilla.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add gradually one cup sugar, stirring
constantly. Beat egg yolks thick and light, add gradually remaining cup
of sugar; combine mixtures. Add melted chocolate. Mix and sift flour,
baking powder and salt; add to first mixture alternately with milk. Add
nut meats and vanilla, then cut and fold in the whites of eggs beaten
stiff. Turn into a well-greased tube pan and bake forty-five minutes in
a moderate oven. Cool and spread with boiled frosting.

[Sidenote: _January_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â WITH EGG BALLS

          CELERY      OLIVES

          BREADED SEA BASS--SAUCE TARTARE

          NORWEGIAN POTATOES      STEWED TOMATOES

          CABBAGE RELISH

          LEMON PIE      CHEESE

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSOMM√â WITH EGG BALLS

To six cups of hot Consomm√© add egg balls, serving three or four in each
portion.


EGG BALLS

          1 hard cooked egg.
          1/8 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains pepper.
          Few drops onion juice.
          1 teaspoon thick cream.
          1/4 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.

PROCESS: Mash yolk, rub through a sieve, add finely chopped white,
seasonings, parsley and cream. Moisten with some of the yolk of a raw
egg until of the consistency to handle. Shape with the hands in tiny
balls and poach two minutes in boiling water or a little consomm√©.
Remove with skimmer. Serve at once.


BREADED SEA BASS

Remove the skin from a sea bass, bone and cut fillets in pieces for
serving. Rub over with the cut side of a lemon, sprinkle with salt,
pepper, dredge with flour. Dip in egg (diluted with two tablespoons cold
water) then in fine cracker crumbs; repeat. Place in croquette basket
and fry in deep, hot Cottolene. Drain, arrange on hot serving platter.
Garnish with Norwegian Potatoes, parsley and slices of lemon. Serve
Sauce Tartare in a sauce boat.

(For recipe for Sauce Tartare see page 84.)


NORWEGIAN POTATOES

Wash, scrub and pare six medium size potatoes. Cook in boiling salted
water until tender. Drain, pass through ricer. Add six anchovies drained
from the oil in bottle and cut in one-fourth inch pieces, one-half
teaspoon finely chopped parsley, one-half teaspoon French mustard, salt
if necessary, one-eighth teaspoon pepper, a few grains nutmeg, two
tablespoons butter, and yolks two eggs slightly beaten. Beat thoroughly,
place on range and cook slowly three minutes, stirring constantly.
Remove from range, spread mixture on plate to cool, then mold like small
eggs. Roll in crumbs, egg and crumbs. Arrange in croquette basket and
fry a golden brown in deep, hot Cottolene.


STEWED TOMATOES

To one can of hot tomatoes add two-thirds cup toasted bread crumbs.
Season with salt, few drops Tobasco sauce, two tablespoons sugar, and
one-fourth cup butter. Heat to boiling point and turn into hot serving
dish.


CABBAGE RELISH

Chop crisp, white cabbage very fine (there should be two cups). Chop one
green pepper and one medium-sized Bermuda onion the same. Mix well and
season with one teaspoon salt, one-eighth teaspoon black pepper, one
teaspoon celery seed and three tablespoons sugar. Dilute one-fourth cup
vinegar with two tablespoons cold water; add to relish. Chill and serve
in crisp lettuce leaves.


LEMON PIE

          3/4 cup sugar.
          1 cup boiling water.
          2 tablespoons cornstarch.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          2 egg yolks slightly beaten.
          4 tablespoons lemon juice.
          Grated rind one lemon.
          1 teaspoon butter.
          Few grains salt.

PROCESS: Mix sugar, cornstarch, flour and salt, add boiling water
gradually, stirring constantly. Cook over hot water until mixture
thickens; continue stirring. Add lemon juice, rind, butter, and egg
yolks. Line a pie pan with Rich Paste, wet edges, and lay around a rim
of pastry one inch wide; flute edge. Cool mixture and turn in lined pan.
Bake in a moderate oven until crust is well browned. Remove from oven,
cool slightly, spread with meringue, return to oven to bake and brown
meringue.


MERINGUE

          Whites 2 eggs.
          2 tablespoons powdered sugar.
          1/4 teaspoon lemon or orange extract.

PROCESS: Beat whites until stiff and dry; add sugar by the teaspoonful;
continue beating. Add flavoring, drop by drop. Spread unevenly over pie
and bake fifteen minutes in a slow oven; brown the last five minutes of
baking.


CAF√â NOIR (AFTER-DINNER COFFEE)

To prepare after-dinner coffee, use twice the quantity of coffee or half
the quantity of water, given in recipe for Boiled Coffee (see Page 30).
This coffee may be prepared in the Percolator, following the directions
given in the foregoing. Milk or cream is not served with black coffee.
Serve in hot after-dinner coffee cups, with or without cut loaf sugar.

[Sidenote: _January_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          NOODLE SOUP

          BOILED BEEF--HORSERADISH SAUCE

          BAKED POTATOES

          MACARONI WITH TOMATO SAUCE

          CHIFFONADE SALAD

          STEAMED COTTAGE PUDDING

          BANANA SAUCE

          COFFEE      TEA

       *       *       *       *       *

NOODLE SOUP

          2 quarts Chicken Consomm√©.
          1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
          1 recipe noodles cut very fine (see below).

PROCESS: Cook fowl same as for Boiled Fowl (do not tie in cheese cloth).
Drain fowl from stock, and strain. When cold, remove fat, and clear.
Reheat, add noodles, and simmer twenty minutes. Sprinkle with parsley
and serve very hot.


NOODLES

          1 egg.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          Flour.
          Few grains nutmeg.

PROCESS: Beat egg slightly, add seasonings, add flour enough to make a
stiff dough. Knead on a floured board until smooth and elastic. Roll out
on a sheet as thin as paper, cover and let stand for half an hour. Roll
loosely and cut the desired width, either in threads or ribbons, unroll
and scatter over board; let lay half an hour. Cook in boiling, salted
water fifteen minutes, drain and add to soup. Noodles may be cooked in
Consomm√© twenty minutes but the soup will not be as clear as when
noodles are cooked previously.


BOILED BEEF

Have five pounds of beef, cut from the face of the rump. Wipe meat,
sprinkle with salt, pepper, and dredge with flour. Brown richly in an
iron skillet in some of its own fat tried out, turning often. Remove to
kettle and cover with boiling water. Add one tablespoon salt, one-half
teaspoon peppercorns, a bit of bay leaf, one carrot sliced, one turnip
sliced, and one-half onion sliced. Add two sprays each of parsley and
thyme and one of marjoram. Cover and heat to boiling point. Skim when
necessary. Reduce heat and simmer until meat is tender (four or five
hours). Remove to serving platter. Strain stock and use for soup or
sauces. Serve meat with hot Horseradish Sauce. (For recipe see page 51.)


MACARONI WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Cook one cup macaroni, broken in inch pieces, in boiling salted water
twenty minutes. Drain, and pour over cold water to separate pieces. Mix
with one and one-half cups Tomato Sauce. Add one-half cup grated cheese.
Turn into a buttered baking dish, cover with buttered crumbs, bake
twenty minutes in a hot oven.


TOMATO SAUCE

          1 half can tomatoes.
          1/8 teaspoon soda.
          1 teaspoon sugar.
          6 peppercorns.
          2 cloves.
          Slice onion.
          Bit of bay leaf.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains cayenne.
          4 tablespoons butter.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1 cup Brown Stock.

PROCESS: Heat tomatoes to boiling point; add soda and the seven
ingredients following. Cook twenty minutes. Rub through a pur√©e
strainer, add stock. Brown butter in a sauce-pan, add flour and continue
browning, stirring constantly. Add hot tomato mixture slowly, mix well,
and pour over Macaroni.


CHIFFONADE SALAD

Cut the hearts of celery in one-inch pieces, cut pieces in straws to
fill one cup. Remove the pulp from grape fruit, leaving each
half-section in its original shape. There should be one cup. Peel and
chill four medium-sized tomatoes (Southern or hot-house at this season),
cut in slices. Cut the bleached leaves of Chicory in pieces for serving,
arrange in nests on serving dish, and arrange other ingredients in
separate mounds in the nests. Marinate with French Dressing, and garnish
each with chopped parsley, green and red sweet peppers cut in
thread-like strips, and sprays of pepper-grass or parsley. Pass
Mayonnaise Dressing.


STEAMED COTTAGE PUDDING

          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          2 eggs.
          1 cup milk.
          2 cups flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly, add
yolks of eggs beaten very light. Mix and sift flour, baking powder and
salt, add to first mixture alternately with milk; cut and fold in the
stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Turn in a well-buttered tube mold, and
steam one and one-half hours. Serve with Vanilla, Strawberry, or Banana
Sauce.


BANANA SAUCE

          1 cup water.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          Pulp 3 bananas.
          3 tablespoons lemon juice.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          Few grains salt.
          Few gratings lemon rind.

PROCESS: Make a syrup by boiling water and sugar ten minutes. Rub
bananas through a sieve, add remaining ingredients and beat until well
blended and light. Pour on hot syrup slowly, beating constantly. Serve
hot. Pulp of peaches or apricots may be used in place of bananas.

[Sidenote: _January_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          CORN CHOWDER

          CRISP SODA CRACKERS

          OX JOINTS EN CASSEROLE

          BOILED RICE      PARSNIPS SAUT√âD IN BUTTER

          CHEESE AND PIMENTO SALAD

          AMBROSIA      ANISE WAFERS

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CORN CHOWDER

          2 cups cooked corn cut from cob, or
          1 can of corn.
          1 cup salt pork cubes.
          1 cup potatoes cut in cubes.
          1/2 onion sliced.
          3 cups water.
          2 cups scalded milk.
          1 tablespoon butter.
          1 tablespoon flour.
          2/3 cup cracker crumbs.
          Salt, Pepper.

PROCESS: Cut salt pork in one-fourth inch cubes and try out in a frying
pan; add onion, and cook until yellow. Pare and cut potatoes in one-half
inch cubes, parboil five minutes. Add to onion, with corn and water;
cover and cook twenty minutes or until potatoes are soft. Melt butter in
a sauce-pan, add flour, stir to a smooth paste, pour some of the milk on
slowly, stirring constantly. Combine mixtures; add crumbs and
seasonings. Serve for dinner in cups or in small "nappies."


OX JOINTS EN CASSEROLE

Separate ox-tails at joints, parboil five minutes; then rinse
thoroughly. Sprinkle with salt, pepper, and dredge with flour. Melt
one-fourth cup butter in frying pan, add three slices onion and joints,
saut√© until joints are well browned. Remove joints and onion; to fat add
one-fourth cup flour, brown slightly, stirring constantly. Add slowly
two cups of Brown Stock, or water and a large can of tomatoes. Add
one-half tablespoon salt and one-fourth teaspoon pepper. Turn into an
earthen casserole, or Dutch oven, cover, place in oven and simmer slowly
three to four hours. Add more moisture if necessary. Remove joints,
strain liquor, return joints to liquor, add one cup each carrot and
turnip cut in straws and parboiled in boiling, salted water ten minutes,
and set in oven to complete cooking. Serve in Casserole or in a deep
platter surrounded with a border of boiled rice.


BOILED RICE

Wash one cup of rice, drain and add slowly to three quarts boiling
salted water so as not to stop water boiling. Boil rapidly until rice is
tender (twenty to twenty-five minutes). Drain in a sieve, pour over cold
water to separate kernels. Turn into double boiler, and cover with a
crash towel; keep hot over hot water.


PARSNIPS SAUT√âD IN BUTTER

Wash parsnips, cover with boiling water, add salt to season. Cook until
tender--thirty-five to fifty minutes. Drain and cover quickly with cold
water; rub off skins with the hands. Cut in one-fourth inch slices,
sprinkle with salt, pepper; dip in flour and saut√© a golden brown in hot
butter. Brown on one side, then turn and brown on the other.


CHEESE AND PIMENTO SALAD

Mix two cream cheeses with one-half cup finely chopped pimentos. (Drain
pimentos from liquor in can, and dry them on crash towel.) Add one
tablespoon finely chopped chives or onion, one-half teaspoon finely
chopped parsley, season with salt and cayenne. Moisten with thick cream,
and pack solidly in prepared green pepper-cups. Set aside in a cold
place for several hours. With a sharp knife cut in thin slices
crosswise. Arrange two slices on crisp lettuce leaves; serve with French
Dressing.


AMBROSIA

          6 sweet Florida oranges.
          1 cocoanut grated.
          4 plantains (red bananas).
          1/3 cup fine table Sherry wine.
          1/4 cup lemon juice.
          Bar sugar.

PROCESS: Peel the oranges, separate the sections, remove the tough
membrane and seeds. Dispose a layer of orange pulp in bottom of shallow,
glass, serving-dish, sprinkle with wine and lemon juice and sugar, strew
with cocoanut and a layer of thinly sliced banana. Repeat until all
ingredients are used, having a thick layer of cocoanut on top. The fruit
should be piled in cone shape. Chill and serve with dainty cakes,
macaroons, Anise wafers, etc.


ANISE SEED WAFERS

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup granulated sugar.
          3 eggs.
          2 cups flour.
          3 teaspoons anise seed.
          1/4 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          Flour.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, add egg yolks, one at a
time, beating constantly. Beat whites of eggs stiff, add to first
mixture alternately with flour mixed and sifted with anise seed, nutmeg
and salt. Add just enough extra flour to dough to roll very thin. Shape
with small, fluted cutter, and bake in a quick oven.

[Sidenote: _January_

_Fifth Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTERS ON THE HALF SHELL

          CONSOMM√â WITH RICE BALLS

          BRAISED BEEF TONGUE--SAVORY SAUCE

          BAKED POTATOES      BERMUDA ONIONS, BUTTER SAUCE

          CREAMED CELERY

          FLORIDA SALAD

          YANKEE PLUM PUDDING--VANILLA SAUCE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTERS ON THE HALF SHELL

(For recipe see Page 14.) Serve small cress or cucumber sandwiches with
this course.


CONSOMM√â WITH RICE BALLS

To six cups of hot Consomm√©, (for recipe see Page 149), add Rice Balls.


RICE BALLS

          1 cup cold, cooked rice.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1 teaspoon grated onion.
          1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
          1 egg slightly beaten.
          Salt, pepper, cayenne.

PROCESS: Warm rice slightly and rub through a sieve, add flour,
seasonings, and bind together with egg. Measure mixture by the
teaspoonful. Roll in small balls. Poach until firm on outside in boiling
salted water. Remove with skimmer and drop into clear, hot soup.


BRAISED BEEF TONGUE

Order a fresh tongue. Wash and put tongue in a kettle, cover with
boiling water; cook slowly two to three hours. Remove tongue from water,
peel off skin, and trim off roots. Place in Dutch oven or deep earthen
dish, and surround with one-half cup each carrot, turnip, celery and
onion, cut in half-inch dice, one green pepper (seeds and veins removed)
cut in shreds, and two sprays parsley. Pour over one quart of Brown
Sauce seasoned with one-half tablespoon Worcestershire sauce. (Stock in
which tongue was cooked may be used for making sauce.) Cover closely and
simmer slowly (do not allow sauce to boil) two hours or until tongue is
tender. Serve on hot platter. Surround with sauce.


BAKED POTATOES

(For recipe see Page 140.)


BERMUDA ONIONS WITH BUTTER SAUCE

Peel the desired number of Bermuda onions. Cover with boiling water.
Heat to boiling point, boil five minutes, drain; repeat. Then cover with
boiling salted water, and cook until tender (from forty-five minutes to
one hour). Drain well. Dot over with bits of butter, finely chopped
parsley, and pepper. Serve hot.


CREAMED CELERY

Wash, scrape and cut celery in one-half inch pieces. Cook in boiling
salted water until tender; drain. (There should be two cups.) Cut a
slice from the stem end of one green or red pepper, remove the seeds and
veins. Parboil pepper eight minutes; drain and chop half the pepper
fine. Add to celery, and reheat in one cup of White Sauce.


FLORIDA SALAD

Remove the peel from six large Florida Navel oranges. Separate the
sections, and peel off the membrane, keeping the pulp in its original
shape. Cut each section crosswise once. Dispose the orange cubes equally
in nests of lettuce-heart leaves. Arrange the halves of English walnuts
over these and marinate with French Dressing, using lemon and orange
juice, also some of the fine orange pulp, in place of vinegar. Sprinkle
with paprika.


YANKEE PLUM PUDDING

          2/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup N. O. molasses.
          3 cups flour.
          1-1/2 teaspoons soda.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/2 teaspoon cloves.
          1/2 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup sweet milk.
          1 cup seeded shredded raisins.
          1 cup English Walnut meats broken in pieces.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add molasses; mix and sift flour, soda, spices
and salt; add alternately with milk, reserving enough flour to dredge
raisins and nut meats; mix well and turn in buttered molds. Steam three
hours. Serve with Brandy or Vanilla Sauce. (For recipe Vanilla Sauce see
Page 136.)


BOILED COFFEE

          1 cup medium ground coffee.
          White 1 egg.
          6 cups boiling water.
          1 cup cold water.

PROCESS: Scald a granite-ware coffeepot. Beat egg slightly and dilute
with one-half cup cold water, add to coffee and mix thoroughly. Turn
into coffeepot and add boiling water, stir well. Place on range; let
boil five minutes. If not boiled sufficiently, coffee will not be clear;
if boiled too long, the tannic acid will be extracted, causing serious
gastric trouble. Stuff the spout of pot with soft paper to prevent the
escape of aroma. Stir down, pour off one cup to clear the spout of
grounds, return to pot. Add remaining half-cup cold water to complete
the clearing process. Place pot on back of range for ten minutes, where
coffee will not boil. Serve immediately. If coffee must be kept longer,
drain from the grounds and keep just below boiling point.




_February_

          _Variety's the very spice of life,
           That gives it all its flavor._
                              --_Cowper._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _February_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          GRAPE-FRUIT COCKTAILS

          TOMATO BOUILLON

          LAKE TROUT BAKED IN PAPER BAG

          SAUCE √Ä L'ITALIENNE

          FRENCH FRIED POTATOES      BRUSSELS SPROUTS

          FRENCH ENDIVE--FRENCH DRESSING

          EGGLESS RICE PUDDING--HARD SAUCE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAPE-FRUIT COCKTAIL

Select heavy grape-fruit (weight means more pulp than rind). Chill, cut
in halves, and remove the sections of pulp, preserving the shape of
sections if possible. Remove the skins from Malaga grapes, cut in halves
lengthwise, remove seeds (there should be equal quantity of both
grape-fruit pulp and prepared grapes). Reserve the juice. Chill fruit
thoroughly, serve in tall stem glasses, add a little juice, sprinkle
each with a tablespoon bar sugar, and just before serving pour over each
portion one tablespoon Sloe Gin or "Sweet" Sherry Wine.


TOMATO BOUILLON

To five cups of Standard Broth add one cup of thick tomato pur√©e. Reheat
and serve in bouillon cups.


STANDARD BROTH

(BEEF, VEAL, LAMB, CHICKEN OR GAME)

          4 pounds meat.
          1 pound marrow bone.
          2-1/2 quarts cold water.
          1/2 teaspoon peppercorns.
          4 cloves.
          1 spray marjoram.
          2 sprays thyme.
          2 sprays parsley.
          1/2 bay leaf.
          1/4 cup each diced carrot, onion, and celery.
          1/2 tablespoon salt.

PROCESS: Remove meat from bone and cut in inch cubes; brown richly one
third of meat in some of the marrow taken from bone. Cover remainder of
meat with cold water, let stand thirty minutes, then add browned meat
and rinse the pan in which meat was browned with some of the water.
Bring to boiling point and skim. Reduce heat and boil gently five hours;
stock should be reduced to three pints. Add seasonings the last hour of
cooking. Strain, cool, remove fat, and clear.


LAKE TROUT BAKED IN PAPER BAG

Clean a four-pound lake trout. Sprinkle inside with salt and pepper.
Fill with stuffing (recipe next page); sew. Spread with soft butter,
sprinkle with salt and pepper. Lay fish carefully in a well greased
paper bag, add one-fourth cup white wine, one-half onion finely chopped,
six fresh (or ten canned) mushrooms, cut in small pieces, and one-fourth
cup water. Press air from bag, fold open end over three times, fold
sides and corners close to fish, first moistening the bag on corners and
edges; lay in a dripping-pan and place in a hot oven. When bag is
browned evenly (not burned) reduce heat, and bake fish one hour. (Bag
will brown in ten minutes.) Remove from bag to serving platter and pour
contents of bag over fish. Serve with the following sauce:


SAUCE √Ä L'ITALIENNE

          2-1/2 tablespoons butter.
          2 tablespoons finely chopped onion.
          2 tablespoons finely chopped carrot.
          2 tablespoons finely chopped lean uncooked ham.
          1/2 teaspoon peppercorns.
          3 cloves.
          2 sprays marjoram.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1 cup Brown Stock.
          1-1/4 cups white wine.
          1 clove garlic.
          2 teaspoons finely chopped parsley.

PROCESS: Brown butter in a sauce-pan, add onion, carrot, ham,
peppercorns, cloves and marjoram, and cook five minutes. Add flour and
stir until flour is well browned; add gradually stock and wine, strain,
add garlic and simmer five minutes. Remove garlic and pour around Baked
Lake Trout. Sprinkle with parsley.


STUFFING FOR FISH

          1 cup cracker crumbs.
          2 teaspoons finely chopped parsley.
          1 tablespoon finely chopped pickles.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon grated onion.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          1/4 to 1/2 cup boiling water.

PROCESS: Melt butter in hot water; add remaining ingredients in the
order given. Mix lightly with a fork.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS

Look over, remove wilted leaves from sprouts, cover with cold water, let
soak one-half hour. Cook in boiling salted water until tender when
pierced with a wooden skewer. Drain thoroughly, serve with melted
butter, salt (if needed), and pepper, or reheat in thin Cream Sauce,
allowing one cup Sauce for each pint of sprouts.


FRENCH ENDIVE

Remove the imperfect outer stalks from the desired number of heads of
French Endive. If heads are large, cut them in halves lengthwise; if
small, separate the stalks. Wash, drain and chill. Serve with French
Dressing (see Page 83).


EGGLESS RICE PUDDING

          4 cups milk.
          2/3 cup rice.
          1/3 cup molasses.
          1/2 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1 tablespoon butter.
          1/2 cup seeded raisins.
          Salt.

PROCESS: Wash rice; mix ingredients in the order given and pour into a
buttered baking dish; bake three hours in a slow oven, stirring three
times during first hour of cooking to prevent rice from settling. When
stirring the last time, add butter. Serve with Hard Sauce. (For recipe
see Page 161.)

[Sidenote: _February_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CHICKEN CONSOMM√â WITH MACARONI RINGS AND PIMENTOS

          BREAST OF LAMB STUFFED AND ROASTED

          CURRANT JELLY SAUCE

          SWEET POTATOES, SOUTHERN STYLE

          BUTTERED STRING BEANS

          CABBAGE SALAD

          APPLE CAKE WITH LEMON SAUCE

          BOILED COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICKEN CONSOMM√â WITH MACARONI RINGS AND PIMENTOS

          2 quarts Chicken Consomm√©.
          1/2 cup cooked macaroni.
          1 tablespoon pimentos.

PROCESS: Cook macaroni in boiling salted water until tender. Drain and
pour over one cup cold water. With a sharp knife cut in thin rings.
Drain pimentos from the liquor in can, dry on a crash towel. Cut in
strips, then cut strips in small diamonds. Add both to Consomm√©, heat to
boiling point and serve in cups.


BREAST OF LAMB STUFFED AND ROASTED

Peel off the outer skin from a breast of lamb, remove bones, stuff, (see
Page 36), shape in a compact roll and sew. Spread with salt pork fat,
sprinkle with salt, pepper and dredge with flour. Sear the surface over
quickly in hot salt pork fat, then place in the oven. Let cook one hour
and a half, basting often with fat in pan. Serve with French Fried Sweet
Potatoes and Currant Jelly Sauce. Garnish meat with sprays of fresh
mint.


CURRANT JELLY SAUCE

To Brown Sauce (for recipe see Page 82) add one-half cup black or red
currant jelly whipped with a fork, one teaspoon lemon juice and a few
gratings of onion. Heat to boiling point, boil three minutes and serve
in sauce boat. Onion may be omitted.


STUFFING FOR LAMB

          2 cups soft bread crumbs.
          1/4 cup butter.
          1/4 cup hot water.
          1 tablespoon poultry seasoning.
          1 tablespoon finely chopped onion.
          1/2 tablespoon finely chopped parsley.
          Salt, Pepper.

PROCESS: Melt butter in hot water, add to bread crumbs, toss lightly
with a fork. Add remaining ingredients in the order given. If desired
moister, increase the quantity of hot water.


SWEET POTATOES, SOUTHERN STYLE

Peel cold, boiled sweet potatoes and cut lengthwise in slices one-half
inch thick. Arrange in layers in a well-greased quart baking dish. Cover
each layer generously with brown sugar and dots of butter, a sprinkle of
salt and pepper. Continue until dish is full. Add one cup hot water and
bake in hot oven until liquor is "syrupy" and potatoes are brown on top.


BUTTERED STRING BEANS

Remove the strings and cut beans diagonally in one-half inch pieces.
Wash and cook in boiling water from one to three hours, adding salt the
last half hour of cooking. Drain and reheat in White Sauce or dress with
melted butter, pepper and more salt if needed. If canned beans are used
(and they would be in some localities at this season of the year) turn
them from the can into sauce-pan and reheat them in their own liquor.
Drain and dress them with melted butter, salt, and pepper.


CABBAGE SALAD

Use only the center of a firm head of white cabbage. Shred it very fine
and cover with ice water until crisp. Drain thoroughly and mix with one
medium-sized, thinly sliced Spanish onion. Mix with either French or
Cream Salad Dressing (for recipe see Page 105).


APPLE CAKE WITH LEMON SAUCE

          2 cups flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon soda.
          1 teaspoon cream of tartar.
          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1 egg well beaten.
          7/8 cup milk.
          4 tart, fine flavored apples.
          3 tablespoons granulated sugar.
          1/4 teaspoon cinnamon.

PROCESS: Mix and sift the dry ingredients in the order given; rub in
Cottolene with tips of fingers; add beaten egg to milk and add slowly to
first mixture stirring constantly, then beat until dough is smooth.
Spread dough evenly in a shallow, square layer cake pan to the depth of
one inch. Core, pare and cut apples in eighths, lay them in parallel
rows on top of dough, pressing the sharp edge into the dough half the
depth of apples. Sprinkle sugar and cinnamon over top. Bake in hot oven
twenty-five to thirty minutes. Serve hot with butter as a luncheon dish,
or as a dessert for dinner with Lemon Sauce.


LEMON SAUCE

          2 teaspoons arrowroot.
          1 cup sugar.
          2 cups boiling water.
          Grated rind and juice of 1 lemon.
          1 tablespoon butter.
          Few grains salt.

PROCESS: Mix arrowroot, sugar and salt, pour on boiling water slowly,
stirring constantly. Cook over hot water twenty minutes, stirring
constantly the first five minutes, afterwards occasionally. Remove from
range. Add lemon juice, rind, and butter in small bits. Beat well and
serve hot.

[Sidenote: _February_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          SCOTCH POTATO SOUP

          ROAST SHOULDER OF PORK

          SPICED APPLE SAUCE

          ERIN POTATOES      BOILED WHITE BEANS

          CELERY SALAD

          SQUASH PIE      NEUFCHATEL CHEESE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

SCOTCH POTATO SOUP

          1 bunch leeks or 2 cups onion.
          1 head celery.
          5 tablespoons butter.
          1 quart milk.
          3 cups potato cubes.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 tablespoon finely chopped parsley.
          Salt, pepper.

PROCESS: Cut leeks and celery in thin slices crosswise and saut√© in two
tablespoons butter eight minutes (without browning), stirring
constantly. Turn milk into double boiler, add leeks and celery; cover
and cook until vegetables are tender (about forty-five minutes). Parboil
potato cubes in boiling salted water ten minutes. Melt remaining butter
in a sauce-pan, add flour, stir to a smooth paste, remove from range and
pour on slowly some of the milk until mixture is of the consistency to
pour. Combine mixtures, add seasonings, and cook in double boiler until
potatoes are tender. Turn into hot soup tureen and sprinkle with
parsley.


ROAST SHOULDER OF PORK

Have meat cut from "little pig." Wipe and follow directions for roasting
Loin of Pork. (See Page 173.)


SPICED APPLE SAUCE

Wipe, pare and core six or eight tart apples. Place them in sauce-pan,
add just enough water to prevent burning; add three or four cloves and
half a dozen Cassia buds. Cook to a mush. Pass through a sieve; return
to sauce-pan, add three-fourths cup sugar and cook five minutes,
stirring constantly. Cool and serve.


ERIN POTATOES

Remove seeds and veins and parboil one mild green pepper eight minutes.
Chop fine, add to Mashed Potatoes.


BOILED WHITE BEANS

Pick over and wash two cups white beans; cover with two quarts cold
water and let soak overnight; drain and place them in a stew-pan, cover
with two quarts cold water, add one small carrot cut in quarters, one
medium-sized onion cut in half, two sprays parsley and one-quarter pound
of lean salt pork, one-half tablespoon salt; cover and cook slowly until
beans are tender (about two hours). Remove vegetables, drain beans. Chop
the pork and mix with beans.


CELERY SALAD

Scrape and wash the tender hearts of crisp celery, cut in one-inch
pieces; cut pieces in straws lengthwise; there should be two cups. Add
one cup blanched and shredded almonds, mix well and marinate with French
Dressing and let stand one hour. Drain and arrange in nests of heart
lettuce leaves, sprinkle with the rings of Spanish onion thinly sliced
(using the heart rings). Mask with Mayonnaise or with Boiled Salad
Dressing.


SQUASH PIE (ECONOMICAL)

Bake the half of a Hubbard squash, scoop out the pulp, rub through a
strainer. (There should be one and one-half cups.) Add one cup hot milk,
one-half cup sugar, one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon ginger,
one-fourth teaspoon nutmeg and one egg well beaten. Mix well. Line a pie
pan with Plain Paste, put an extra rim of pastry around edge of pie,
flute rim and turn in mixture. Bake thirty minutes in a moderately hot
oven.

[Sidenote: _February_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          TOMATO SOUP

          ROAST GUINEA FOWL--GIBLET SAUCE

          RHUBARB SAUCE

          POTATO SOUFFL√âS--EGG-PLANT WITH FINE HERBS

          DRESSED HEAD LETTUCE

          ORANGE ICE--CHOCOLATE JUMBLES

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

TOMATO SOUP

          1 can tomatoes, or 1 quart tomatoes peeled and cut in pieces.
          2 slices onion.
          2 sprays parsley.
          Bit of bay leaf.
          4 cloves.
          1/2 teaspoon peppercorns.
          Few gratings nutmeg.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          Salt, pepper, cayenne.

PROCESS: Cook the first six ingredients together twenty minutes. Rub
through a pur√©e strainer, keep hot. Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add
flour and stir to a smooth paste, let cook one minute; dilute with
tomato mixture to the consistency to pour. Combine mixtures and season
with salt, a few grains cayenne and a grating of nutmeg. Reheat and
serve with crisp, toasted Saratoga Wafers.


ROAST GUINEA FOWL

Clean, singe, draw and truss in the same way as for roasting chicken.
Stuff if desired. Sprinkle with salt and pepper. Lay very thin slices of
fat salt pork over the breast, wings and legs. Place in a covered
roasting pan, pour in one-half cup water, set in oven and roast from
forty-five minutes to one hour (continue cooking if liked well done),
turning so as to brown evenly. (When the roasting pan is used there need
be no basting.) If roasted in an open dripping-pan, baste every ten to
fifteen minutes. The flesh of this bird is dry and is therefore best
cooked rare. Serve as roast chicken. Prepare sauce same as Giblet Sauce.
(See Page 154.)


RHUBARB SAUCE

The young, tender stalks of rhubarb need only be washed, tops and root
cut off, then cut in one-inch pieces (without peeling). Put in a
sauce-pan, add just enough water to prevent burning. Cook slowly until
soft. Add sugar to sweeten to taste, cook five minutes, cool and turn
into serving dish.


POTATO SOUFFL√âS

Select six medium-sized, rather flat potatoes. Wash, pare and trim them
square, then cut lengthwise in slices one-eighth of an inch thick (no
thicker). Wash and dry them on a towel. Drop a few at a time into hot
Cottolene (not smoking hot), fry them four minutes, turning them
occasionally. Remove with skimmer to a croquette basket, let stand five
minutes while the fat is heating. When hot enough to brown an inch cube
of bread in forty seconds, place the basket containing potatoes into
fat, shake constantly and fry two minutes. Drain on brown paper. Repeat
process until all potatoes are used. Sprinkle with salt and dispose
around roasted Guinea Fowl.


EGG-PLANT SAUT√â (WITH FINE HERBS)

Pare a medium-sized egg-plant, cut in very thin slices, sprinkle with
salt and pile in a colander. Cover with a plate and weights to press out
the acrid juice; let stand two hours, sprinkle with pepper, dredge with
flour, and saut√© in hot butter until crisp and a golden brown. Mix
together one-half teaspoon each finely chopped parsley and chives,
one-fourth teaspoon very finely chopped chervil and sprinkle lightly
over egg-plant as soon as crisp. Arrange on hot serving dish and serve
at once.


DRESSED HEAD LETTUCE

Remove the outer green leaves from two medium-sized heads of crisp head
lettuce. Wash carefully, without separating the leaves; drain dry in a
wire basket or on towels. Cut heads in halves lengthwise and arrange in
salad bowl. Set aside in a cool place, and, just before serving, pour
over French Dressing. Serve at once.


ORANGE ICE

          4 cups water.
          2-1/2 cups sugar.
          2 cups orange juice.
          1/2 cup lemon juice.
          Rind of two oranges.

PROCESS: Pare the rind as thinly as possible from two oranges; add to
water and sugar, and cook twenty minutes. Remove rind, add fruit juice,
strain, cool and freeze. Serve in stem glasses.


CHOCOLATE JUMBLES

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          2 squares chocolate grated.
          1 tablespoon milk or water.
          2 eggs beaten thick and light.
          2 teaspoons baking powder.
          2 cups flour.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon vanilla.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly, add
chocolate, milk and eggs. Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt;
add to first mixture. Add more flour if necessary. Dough should be soft.
Toss on a floured board, roll out to one-half inch thickness, shape with
a doughnut cutter, sprinkle with granulated sugar and bake ten to twelve
minutes in a hot oven.




_March_


          _What and how great the virtue and the art
           To live on little with a cheerful heart._
                                            --_Pope._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _March_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          SPRING SOUP--CRUSTS

          BREAST OF VEAL ROASTED--BROWN SAUCE

          SPANISH RICE      MASHED PARSNIPS

          PINEAPPLE FRITTERS

          RED CABBAGE, CELERY AND ONION SALAD

          STEAMED CURRANT PUDDING

          DRIED APRICOT AND HARD SAUCE

          SMALL CUPS COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

SPRING SOUP

          3 bunches chopped watercress.
          1 bunch young onions.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 cup thin cream.
          Yolk 1 egg slightly beaten.
          Salt, pepper.
          Parsley finely chopped.

PROCESS: Pick off the leaves of cress and chop fine. Cut onions in thin
slices. Cook watercress and onions in butter five minutes (without
browning), add flour and salt, stir until smooth, then pour milk on
gradually, stirring constantly. Cook over hot water twenty minutes. Add
beef extract, stir until dissolved; season with Worcestershire sauce and
a few grains cayenne. Strain into hot soup tureen, add whipped cream and
sprinkle with finely chopped parsley.


CRUSTS

Cut stale sandwich bread lengthwise in one-inch thick slices and remove
crusts. Cut slices in bars one inch wide and six inches long. Bake in a
hot oven until delicately browned. Turn them so that crusts may brown
evenly on all sides. Serve hot and crisp.


BREAST OF VEAL ROASTED

Six pounds of veal cut from the breast. Wipe, and skewer meat into
shape, sprinkle with salt, pepper, dredge with flour and cover top with
thin slices of fat salt pork. Lay in a dripping pan and strew cubes of
pork around meat. Place in a very hot oven for the first half hour,
basting every ten minutes with fat in pan, then reduce heat and cook
meat slowly until tender, allowing twenty minutes to pound; continue
basting. The last half hour of cooking remove salt pork, dredge meat
again with flour, and brown richly. Remove meat to hot serving platter,
surround with Spanish Rice and prepare a Brown Sauce from some of the
fat in pan. (See Page 82 for Brown Sauce.)


SPANISH RICE

Cover one cup of rice with cold water; heat to boiling point and boil
two minutes. Drain in a strainer, rinse well with cold water and drain
again. Cut four slices of bacon in shreds, crosswise, and cook until
crisp. Remove bacon, add to rice. Cut one-half of a green or red pepper
in shreds and cook in bacon fat until soft, then add pepper and bacon
fat to rice. Cover with three cups of well-seasoned chicken broth,
season well with salt, cover and let cook until rice has absorbed broth
and is tender, then add one cup of thick tomato pur√©e and two-thirds cup
of grated cheese. Mix well with a fork and let heat through over boiling
water. Serve with roast veal or breaded veal cutlets.


MASHED PARSNIPS

Wash and cook in boiling water, drain and plunge into cold water, when
the skins may be easily rubbed off. Mash and rub through a sieve. Season
with salt, pepper, butter and moisten with a little cream or milk.
Reheat over hot water and serve.


PINEAPPLE FRITTERS

Drain sliced pineapple from the liquor in the can. Dry on a crash towel.
Dip in batter and fry a golden brown in deep hot Cottolene. Drain on
brown paper, sprinkle with powdered sugar and serve with some of the
liquor from which it was drained. This may be slightly thickened with
arrowroot, allowing one teaspoon arrowroot to each cup of liquor.

BATTER FOR FRITTERS

          1 cup bread flour.
          1 tablespoon sugar.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          2/3 cup milk.
          1/2 teaspoon melted Cottolene.
          White one egg beaten stiff.

PROCESS: Mix flour, sugar and salt. Add milk slowly, stirring constantly
until batter is smooth; add Cottolene and white of egg. Batter must be
smooth as cream.


RED CABBAGE, CELERY AND ONION SALAD

Select a small, solid head of red cabbage; remove the wilted leaves. Cut
in quarters and cut out the tough stalk and the coarse ribs of the
leaves. Cover with cold water and let soak until cabbage is crisp;
drain, then shave in thin shreds, and mix with the hearts of two or
three heads (according to their size) of crisp celery, cut in small
pieces crosswise. Add one medium-sized Spanish onion, finely chopped,
and dress with Boiled Salad Dressing. Serve in lettuce heart leaves or
in nests of cress.


STEAM CURRANT PUDDING

          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          2-1/2 cups flour.
          3-1/2 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 egg well beaten.
          1 cup milk.
          1/2 cup currants.

PROCESS: Mix and sift the dry ingredients (reserving two tablespoons
flour), rub in Cottolene with tips of fingers. Sprinkle two tablespoons
flour over cleaned currants, add to first mixture; add milk gradually,
beat well and turn into a buttered mold; cover and steam two hours.
Serve with Dried Apricot and Hard Sauce.


DRIED APRICOT SAUCE

Wash and pick over dried apricots, soak over night in cold water to
cover. Cook until soft and quite dry, in the water in which they were
soaked. Rub through a sieve and sweeten to taste. Reheat, and drop a
spoonful on each portion of pudding, place a small star of Hard Sauce in
center and serve.

[Sidenote: _March_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CHICKEN STEW WITH DUMPLINGS

          ONIONS IN CREAM      STEWED CORN

          WATERCRESS AND EGG SALAD

          RHUBARB PIE      CREAM CHEESE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

STEWED CHICKEN

Dress, clean and cut up a chicken (a year old). Put in a stew-pan, cover
with boiling water. Add one small onion sliced, two stalks celery cut in
pieces, two sprays parsley and one-half teaspoon peppercorns. Cover and
cook slowly until tender. Add one tablespoon salt the last hour of
cooking. Remove chicken, strain liquor and remove some of the fat if
necessary. Thicken the stock with two-thirds cup of flour diluted with
sufficient cold water to pour readily. Return chicken to "gravy," heat
to boiling point. Drop dumplings on top of chicken, cover stew-pan with
a towel, replace the cover and steam dumplings twelve minutes. Arrange
chicken on hot serving platter, surround with dumplings, sprinkle
lightly with finely chopped parsley.


DUMPLINGS

          2 cups flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon Cottolene.
          3/4 cup milk.

PROCESS: Sift together twice, flour, baking powder and salt, rub in
Cottolene with tips of fingers. Add milk gradually, mixing it in with a
knife. Drop from tip of spoon on top of meat, an inch apart; cover
closely and steam twelve minutes.


ONIONS WITH CREAM

Select silver-skin onions of a uniform size; peel and cover with boiling
water, bring to boiling point, drain and repeat. Then cover with boiling
water, season with salt and cook until onions are tender (from
forty-five to sixty minutes). Drain and add one-half cup hot cream (to
eight onions). Sprinkle with black pepper and serve.


STEWED DRIED CORN

Soak two cups dried sweet corn overnight, in cold water to cover. In the
morning place on range and simmer slowly until corn is tender and water
is absorbed, add more water if necessary. Add one-fourth cup butter, two
teaspoons sugar, one-fourth cup cream or milk, salt and pepper. Be
careful that corn does not scorch.


WATERCRESS AND EGG SALAD

Wash thoroughly, trim off roots, drain, and chill watercress. Arrange
nests of the cress on individual salad plates. Cut four hard-cooked eggs
in halves crosswise, in such a manner that tops of whites will be
notched. Remove yolks, rub through a sieve, season with salt, pepper and
moisten with Boiled Salad Dressing to the consistency to handle. Shape
in balls the original size, dip in finely chopped parsley and replace in
whites. Dispose one "cup" in each nest, and just before serving marinate
with French Dressing.


RHUBARB PIE

          2 cups rhubarb.
          3/4 cup sugar.
          1 egg slightly beaten.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          Few grains salt.
          Few grains nutmeg.

PROCESS: If rhubarb is young and tender it need not be peeled. Cut the
stalks in half-inch pieces before measuring. Mix sugar, flour, egg, salt
and nutmeg. Add to rhubarb, toss together until ingredients are well
mixed. Turn into a pie pan lined with paste, heap rhubarb well in
center, cover with a top crust and bake thirty-five minutes in a hot
oven. (When rhubarb is older it may be scalded before using.)

[Sidenote: _March_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTER COCKTAILS IN GRAPE FRUIT

          PLANKED WHITEFISH

          MASHED POTATOES      FRICASSEED TOMATOES

          BUTTERED BEETS

          ALABAMA SALAD

          RAISIN PIE      EDAM CHEESE

          BOILED COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTER COCKTAIL IN GRAPE FRUIT

Prepare the grape fruit in the usual way. Chill; just before serving
place five Blue Point oysters in the cavity made by removing the tough
portions in each half grape fruit. Season with lemon juice, salt,
paprika and one or two drops of Tobasco sauce. Serve on beds of shaved
ice. Garnish with foliage.


PLANKED WHITEFISH

Clean and split a three-pound whitefish. Lay, skin side down, on a hot,
well-greased oak plank (one and one-half inches thick and two or more
inches longer and wider than the fish). Brush fish over with soft butter
and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Surround fish with a border of coarse
salt to prevent plank from burning. Bake twenty-five minutes in a hot
oven, or place plank on broiler and broil twenty minutes under the gas
flame. Remove to table covered with a sheet of brown paper, scrape off
salt, wipe the edges of plank with a piece of cheese cloth wrung from
hot water; spread fish with Ma√Ætre d'H√¥tel Butter; surround with a
border made of hot mashed potato, passing it through pastry bag and rose
tube. Garnish with sprays of parsley and sliced lemon. Serve
immediately.


FRICASSEED TOMATOES

Select firm, not over-ripe tomatoes. Cut in halves crosswise. Sprinkle
with salt, pepper and a grating of onion; dredge with flour and saut√© in
melted butter; brown first on cut side, then turn and finish cooking on
the other. When soft, but not broken, pour over thin cream to almost
cover. Let simmer until cream is slightly thickened. Remove to hot
serving dish and pour cream around.


ALABAMA SALAD

Cut the hearts of celery in one-fourth inch pieces, there should be two
cups. Add one cup of Alabama pecan nut meats broken in quarters and one
cup white cabbage cut in very fine shreds. Moisten with Cream Dressing.
Serve on a bed of cress.

CREAM DRESSING

          3 hard cooked egg yolks.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains cayenne.
          1 teaspoon mustard.
          2 tablespoons vinegar.
          Few drops onion juice or
          1 teaspoon finely chopped chives.
          1-1/2 cups thick cream.

PROCESS: Mash and rub the egg yolks through a sieve, add seasonings
(except cayenne), then vinegar and chives. Whip cream until stiff, and
add a little at a time to first mixture, beating constantly. When all is
used, sprinkle in a few grains cayenne or paprika.


RAISIN PIE

          1-1/2 cups seeded raisins cut in halves.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          2 tablespoons butter.
          Juice and grated rind 1 lemon.
          1 cup water in which raisins were cooked.
          Few grains salt.

_Process_: Cook raisins in boiling water to cover, until tender, drain,
and mix with sugar, grated rind, flour and salt. Cool slightly. Turn
into pie-pan lined with Plain Paste, dot over with butter and pour over
water. Cover with top crust made of Rich Paste and bake thirty minutes
in a moderate oven.


[Sidenote: _March_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF LETTUCE

          BAKED HAM--HOT HORSERADISH SAUCE

          SWEET POTATO CROQUETTES--SPINACH WITH EGGS

          GRAPE FRUIT SALAD

          CHEESE BALLS

          RHUBARB TART--CHEESE

          AFTER DINNER COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

BAKED HAM

Select a lean ham, weighing from twelve to fourteen pounds, cover with
cold water or equal parts of water and sweet cider and let soak (skin
side up) over night. Drain, scrape and trim off all objectionable parts
about the knuckle. Cover flesh side with a dough made of flour and
water. Place in a dripping pan, skin side down. Bake in a hot oven until
dough is a dark brown; reduce heat and bake very slowly five hours. Ham
enclosed in dough needs no basting. Remove dough, turn ham over and peel
off the skin. Sprinkle ham with sugar, cover with grated bread crumbs
and bake twenty to thirty minutes. Remove from oven and decorate with
cloves; place a paper frill on knuckle, garnish with sprays of parsley
and lemon cut in fancy shapes. Serve hot or cold.


HOT HORSERADISH SAUCE

          1/4 cup freshly grated horseradish.
          1/4 cup fine cracker crumbs.
          1-1/2 cups milk.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1 tablespoon vinegar.
          2 tablespoons lemon juice.
          1/2 tablespoon grated onion.

PROCESS: Cook crumbs, horseradish and milk twenty minutes in double
boiler. Add seasonings, vinegar and lemon juice slowly, stirring
constantly. Add grated onion, reheat and serve.


SWEET POTATO CROQUETTES

          2 cups hot riced sweet potatoes.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains pepper.
          1/2 cup chopped walnut meats.
          1 egg well beaten.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given. If mixture is too dry add
hot milk. Mold in cork-shape croquettes, roll in crumbs, then in egg,
again in crumbs, and fry in deep hot Cottolene. Drain on brown paper and
arrange around Baked Ham.


GRAPE FRUIT SALAD

Cut three large grape fruit in halves crosswise, remove the pulp and
keep in its original shape. Arrange in nests of white crisp lettuce
heart leaves, dividing pulp in six portions. Strew one cup of English
walnut meats, broken in fourths, over grape fruit. Marinate with French
Dressing, but with less salt and using paprika in place of cayenne, and
lemon and grape fruit juice in place of vinegar.


CHEESE BALLS

          1-1/2 cups grated cheese.
          1 tablespoon flour.
          1/3 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon mustard.
          Few grains cayenne.
          Whites 3 eggs beaten stiff.

PROCESS: Add flour and seasonings to cheese, fold in whites of eggs,
shape in small balls. Roll in fine cracker crumbs and fry a golden brown
in deep hot Cottolene. Drain on brown paper.


RHUBARB TARTS

If rhubarb is pink, young and tender, simply wash and cut in one-half
inch pieces; there should be two and one-half cups. Cover with boiling
water and heat to boiling point; boil five minutes. Do not allow it to
lose its shape. Drain off all the juice, sprinkle rhubarb with
three-fourths cup sugar. Sift over two tablespoons flour and one-fourth
teaspoon salt, dot over with one tablespoon butter and a grating of
orange rind. Mix well and turn into a pie pan lined with Rich Paste.
Arrange strips of pastry, lattice-work fashion, across the top of pie
and bake thirty minutes in a moderate oven.




_April_


          _Let hunger move thy appetite,
           And not savory sauces._
                             --_Shakespeare._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _April_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          STRAWBERRY COCKTAILS

          CHICKEN BOUILLON CHANTILLY

          FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN WITH WAFFLES

          SPINACH WITH EGGS

          PRUNE AND PECAN NUT SALAD

          APRICOT MARMALADE MOLD

          COCOANUT CAKE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICKEN BOUILLON CHANTILLY

Pour six cups of hot, well-seasoned Chicken Bouillon into hot bouillon
cups. Drop on top of each portion one tablespoon whipped cream
delicately seasoned with salt, pepper and a few grains cayenne. Sprinkle
cream with paprika or finely chopped chives.


FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN

Dress, singe, clean and cut two young chickens in pieces for serving.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper, and dredge with flour, brown richly in
equal parts of Cottolene and butter, turning often that pieces may be
evenly browned. Then cover with boiling water to which add a bit of bay
leaf, one-half teaspoon peppercorns, a spray of parsley, six slices
carrot and three slices onion. Cover and simmer until chicken is tender
(from one to one and one-quarter hours). Remove chicken from stock,
cover and keep warm; strain stock; there should be two cups. Melt four
tablespoons butter in a sauce pan, add four tablespoons flour, stir to a
paste, then gradually pour on the two cups hot stock, stirring
constantly; let simmer ten minutes. Remove from range, add one cup of
hot cream and the yolks of two eggs slightly beaten. Reheat chicken in
sauce (do not allow sauce to boil after adding yolks). Serve with
Waffles.


SPINACH WITH DEVILED EGGS

          1 peck spinach.
          1/4 pound bacon.
          Salt, pepper.
          1/3 cup butter.
          Few grains nutmeg.
          5 hard-cooked eggs.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/4 teaspoon pepper.
          1/2 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
          1/2 teaspoon grated onion.
          1/2 cup minced ham.
          Cream Salad Dressing.

PROCESS: Cook spinach in the usual way. Cook the bacon with spinach to
give it flavor. When spinach is tender, remove bacon, drain spinach and
chop fine. Season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Add butter, mix well and
pack into an oval mold. Keep hot over hot water, cut eggs in halves
lengthwise, remove yolks and rub through a sieve. Add ham, salt, pepper,
parsley and onion juice. Moisten with Cream Salad Dressing to bind
mixture together. Refill halves of eggs with this mixture, heaping it
pyramid-like. Turn mold of spinach on hot serving dish and surround with
stuffed eggs.


PRUNE AND NUT SALAD

Buy very select prunes for this purpose (tins holding one or two pounds
are best), cook prunes in the usual way, letting the liquor evaporate
during the latter part of cooking. Prunes should not be as well done as
when serving them as sauce. Drain prunes from the liquor and chill them.
Remove the stones carefully, cut prunes in five pieces lengthwise. Cut
pecan nut meats in four pieces lengthwise. Mix prunes and nut meats,
sprinkle with salt and paprika. For one-half pound prunes and one-fourth
pound shelled nut meats allow one cup whipping cream. Whip cream until
solid, season with one-half teaspoon each salt and paprika; add two
tablespoons lemon juice and one and one-half tablespoons Sherry wine
slowly, while beating constantly. Mix two-thirds of the cream with the
prunes and nuts. Arrange the heart leaves of lettuce on cold, individual
salad plates, pile some of the mixture in each and mask with remaining
whipped cream. Arrange three pieces of prunes on top of each portion,
radiating from center, and place a cherry or strawberry on top of each.


STEAMED SNOW BALLS

(For recipe, see page 168.)


COCOANUT CAKE

          2/3 cup Cottolene.
          2 cups sugar.
          3 eggs.
          3 cups flour.
          5 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup milk.
          1/2 teaspoon each lemon and vanilla.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add one cup sugar gradually, stirring
constantly. Beat yolks thick and light, add remaining cup sugar
gradually, continue beating. Combine mixtures. Mix and sift flour,
baking powder and salt. Add to first mixture alternately with milk. Add
vanilla and fold in the whites of eggs beaten stiff and dry. Turn into
two well-greased, square cake pans and bake fifteen minutes in a
moderate oven. Spread one layer thickly with Boiled Frosting, sprinkle
heavily with fresh grated cocoanut, cover with remaining layer. Spread
top and sides with frosting, and sprinkle with cocoanut before frosting
glazes.

BOILED FROSTING

          2 cups sugar.
          1/4 teaspoon cream of tartar.
          1/2 cup water.
          Whites 2 eggs.

PROCESS: Mix sugar, cream of tartar and water in a sauce pan. Place on
range and stir until mixture begins to boil. When syrup drops from the
wooden spoon thick like honey, remove from range and add eight
tablespoons of the syrup to the stiffly beaten whites of eggs, beating
constantly. Return remaining syrup to range, continue cooking until
syrup spins a thread at least five inches in length. Pour syrup in a
thin stream onto first mixture and beat until cool and slightly glazed
on side of bowl. Spread thickly on cake.

[Sidenote: _April_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          SMOKED STURGEON CANAP√â

          CLAM BROTH      BUTTERED WAFERS

          BROILED FINNAN HADDIE

          POTATOES ON THE HALF SHELL

          PEGGY'S SOUR CABBAGE

          CHEESE SOUFFL√â

          STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

SMOKED STURGEON CANAP√â

Cut stale white bread in one-third inch slices, trim off crust and cut
slices in crescents or triangles--then saut√© a golden brown in butter.
Spread with Anchovy paste or with French mustard, then arrange flaked
smoked sturgeon over canap√©s. Sprinkle thickly with finely chopped
olives and pimentos. Garnish each with a rolled fillet of Anchovy.
Dispose each canap√© on a bread and butter plate covered with a paper
doily and garnish with sprays of parsley.


CLAM BOUILLON

          1 peck of clams (in the shells).
          3 cups cold water.
          Salt, pepper.
          Whipped cream.

PROCESS: Wash and scrub clams with a stiff brush, changing the water
until no sand is seen in bottom of vessel. Put in a kettle, add cold
water, cover closely and bring water gradually to boiling point, steam
until all the shells are opened. Remove clam with shells, strain broth
through double cheese-cloth, season and serve hot in hot bouillon cups.
Drop a spoonful of whipped cream on top of each service and sprinkle
with paprika.


BROILED FINNAN HADDIE

Wash the fish thoroughly; lay in a dripping pan, flesh side down; cover
with cold water and let soak one hour. Drain; cover with hot water, let
soak fifteen minutes. Drain again and wipe dry; brush over with soft
butter and broil fifteen minutes over a slow fire or some distance from
the flame if cooked with gas. Remove to hot serving platter and spread
with Ma√Ætre d'H√¥tel Butter.


POTATOES ON THE HALF SHELL

Select smooth, large, uniform sized potatoes; wash and scrub them
carefully with a brush. Bake and cut them in halves lengthwise; scoop
out the pulp from shells, being careful not to break them. Press pulp
through a ricer; season with salt, pepper, butter and hot cream. Add one
teaspoon finely chopped parsley (to five potatoes), whip mixture until
fluffy, refill shells with mixture, using pastry bag and rose tube.
Place in oven until heated through. Dispose around Finnan Haddie,
interspersed with sprays of parsley.


PEGGY'S SOUR CABBAGE

Select a small, firm head of white cabbage; cut in quarters, remove the
tough stalk and shave crosswise as fine as possible. Put cabbage in a
large frying pan, cover with water, cover closely and cook until cabbage
is tender (from forty to eighty minutes). Season with salt the last
fifteen minutes of cooking. Drain and add one-third to one-half cup of
butter, toss cabbage until well buttered, saut√© until some of the
cabbage is delicately browned. Season with pepper, and add vinegar to
taste. Serve hot.


CHEESE SOUFFL√â

          2 tablespoons butter.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon ground mustard.
          1/4 teaspoon paprika.
          1/2 cup scalded milk.
          1/4 cup grated American cheese.
          Yolks 3 eggs beaten thick and light.
          Whites 3 eggs beaten stiff.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a saucepan; add flour mixed with seasonings,
stir to a smooth paste and add gradually scalded milk, stirring
constantly. Add grated cheese and when cheese is melted remove from
range; add yolks of eggs and continue beating, then cut and fold in the
whites of eggs. Turn mixture into a well-greased, one-quart baking dish
and bake in a moderate oven twenty minutes. Serve at once.


STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE

          2 cups flour.
          3/4 teaspoon salt.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1 cup thin cream.

Process: Sift together flour, salt and baking powder. Rub shortening in
with tips of fingers. Add cream, mix with a knife to a soft dough. Turn
on a floured board, knead slightly and divide the dough into two equal
parts. Pat and roll each piece to one-half inch thickness; lay one piece
in a buttered jelly cake pan, brush over with soft butter and place
remaining piece on top. Bake in a hot oven fifteen minutes. Remove from
oven; invert cake on a hot serving platter. Remove bottom layer (which
is now the top). Spread with soft butter and add a layer of berries
prepared as directed hereafter. Sift generously with bar sugar, replace
remaining cake, cover with berries, sprinkle with sugar, mask with
whipped cream sweetened and flavored with orange extract.

STRAWBERRY MIXTURE

Wash two quarts strawberries; hull and cut each berry in half. Prepare a
syrup by boiling together two cups sugar and one-half cup water four
minutes, cool and pour syrup over berries, or sprinkle raw sugar over
berries and let stand one hour. Lift the berries from syrup and place
between layer and on top of short cake. Strain syrup into a pitcher or
bowl and pass with each portion of short cake.

[Sidenote: _April_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF ASPARAGUS

          BREADED MUTTON CHOPS--SAUCE SIGNORA

          BAKED BANANAS--SULTANA SAUCE

          FRIED WHOLE POTATOES      LETTUCE HEARTS

          STEAMED GRAHAM PUDDING--SHERRY SAUCE

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

BREADED MUTTON CHOPS

Wipe and trim chops, sprinkle with salt, pepper, and dredge with flour.
Dip in egg diluted with cold water or milk (allowing two tablespoons to
each egg), then in fine bread crumbs, repeat if not well coated with
crumbs. Fry in deep hot Cottolene about ten minutes. Drain on brown
paper and serve in a border of hot Mashed Potatoes with Green Pepper, or
in a nest of Green Peas dressed with Ma√Ætre d'H√¥tel Butter.

SAUCE SIGNORA

Cook two tablespoons of chopped, lean, raw ham in one-fourth cup butter
until lightly browned, add one-fourth cup flour, one-half teaspoon salt,
and stir until well blended, then add one and one-half cups of Brown
Stock and one cup of Chili Sauce. Heat to boiling point, stirring
constantly. Reduce heat and simmer ten minutes. This sauce may be
strained or served without straining. Care must be taken that ham is not
overcooked.


BAKED BANANAS WITH SULTANA SAUCE

          6 bananas.
          3/4 cup Sultana raisins.
          2-3/4 cups boiling water.
          1 cup sugar.
          1 tablespoon butter.
          Few grains salt.
          1/4 cup Sherry wine.
          2 tablespoons lemon juice.
          1 tablespoon cornstarch or two teaspoons Arrowroot.

PROCESS: With a sharp knife open and peel down one section of each
banana, carefully loosen the pulp from the rest of the skin; remove pulp
and scrape lightly with a silver knife, removing all the coarse threads.
Replace the pulp in its original shape in the skins. Arrange the bananas
in an agate dripping pan and bake in a moderate oven until the skins are
black and the pulp is soft (from ten to fifteen minutes). Remove pulp
from skins to serving platter, being careful to preserve their shape.
Curve them slightly and pour over

SULTANA SAUCE

Pick over raisins, cover them with water and cook until raisins are
tender. Mix sugar, cornstarch and salt, add slowly to raisins and water,
stirring constantly. Cook slowly twenty minutes; add butter, lemon juice
and wine. Reheat and serve.


FRIED WHOLE POTATOES

Select small potatoes of uniform size. Wash, pare and parboil in boiling
salted water ten minutes. Drain dry and fry a golden brown in deep hot
Cottolene (time required about twelve minutes). Fat should not be hot
enough to brown potatoes until the last five minutes of cooking,
otherwise potatoes will not be cooked throughout. Drain on brown paper,
sprinkle with salt and serve at once.


STEAMED GRAHAM PUDDING

          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1/2 cup N. O. Molasses.
          1/2 cup milk.
          1 egg well beaten.
          1-1/2 cups Graham flour.
          1/2 teaspoon soda.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/4 teaspoon cloves.
          1/2 teaspoon mace.
          1 cup dates stoned and cut in pieces.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add molasses, milk and egg. Mix and sift the
dry ingredients, add dates and stir into first mixture, beat thoroughly.
Turn into a buttered tube mold, cover and steam two and one-half hours.
Serve with Sherry Sauce (recipe Page 130).

[Sidenote: _April_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          SPANISH SOUP

          BAKED HALIBUT

          POTATOES √Ä L'AURORA

          CORN FRITTERS      CABBAGE RELISH

          STEWED RHUBARB WITH PINEAPPLE AND RAISINS

          OLD FASHIONED MARBLE CAKE

       *       *       *       *       *

SPANISH SOUP

          4 cups Brown Stock.
          2 cups tomato pulp.
          1 large, green, finely chopped pepper.
          1 medium-sized onion, finely chopped.
          4 tablespoons butter.
          5 tablespoons flour.
          2 tablespoons freshly grated horseradish.
          1/2 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
          Salt, pepper and cayenne, or
          A few drops Tobasco Sauce.
          1/2 cup hot cooked rice.

PROCESS: Cook pepper and onion in butter five minutes. Add flour, stir
until well blended and delicately browned, then add gradually stock and
tomato pulp; let simmer twenty minutes. Rub through a sieve and season
highly with salt, pepper, and cayenne or Tobasco. Before serving add
Worcestershire, horseradish and rice.


BAKED HALIBUT

Wipe a two-pound slice of halibut. Arrange six or eight thin slices of
fat salt pork in bottom of dripping pan, slice an onion thinly over
pork, add a bit of bay leaf and arrange halibut over onion. Spread
halibut evenly with a butter paste made of four tablespoons butter
worked to a cream with three tablespoons flour. Season with one-half
teaspoon salt and a few grains cayenne. Over butter paste sprinkle
thickly-buttered cracker crumbs, and arrange alternately strips of
pimento and thin slices of bacon over crumbs. Cover with a buttered
paper and bake slowly one hour in a moderate oven. Remove paper the last
fifteen minutes of cooking to brown the crumbs and bacon delicately.
Remove to hot serving platter and garnish with shredded potatoes, sliced
lemon and parsley.


POTATOES AURORA

Cut cold, boiled potatoes in one-fourth inch cubes. There should be
sufficient to fill three cups. Reheat potatoes in two cups of thin white
sauce, turn into hot serving dish. Remove the shells from four
hard-cooked eggs, cut them in halves crosswise, remove the yolks. Cut
whites in rings and arrange rings around edge of potatoes; press the
yolks through a ricer over potatoes. Sprinkle the rings with finely
chopped parsley. Serve at once.


CORN FRITTERS

          1 can corn, chopped fine.
          1 cup flour.
          1 teaspoon baking powder.
          1 teaspoon sugar.
          2 teaspoons salt.
          1/4 teaspoon white pepper.
          2 eggs.

PROCESS: Add dry ingredients, sifted together, to corn; add yolks well
beaten; then fold in whites beaten until stiff. Fry as griddle cakes; or
dip a tablespoon into deep hot Cottolene, drain well, then take up a
spoonful of the corn mixture, drop into hot Cottolene, pushing it off
spoon into hot fat with a spatula. Fry a golden brown. Drain on brown
paper and serve immediately.


CABBAGE RELISH

Remove the wilted and coarse outside leaves from one small, solid head
of white, new cabbage (Southern), cut off stalk, cut head in quarters,
cut out stalk from each quarter and chop cabbage very fine. Add one
medium-sized Bermuda onion, finely chopped. Cover with ice water and let
stand until crisp. Drain thoroughly and mix with Relish Dressing. Serve
in lemon baskets, sprinkle with finely chopped chives, green pepper or
parsley.

RELISH DRESSING

          1 teaspoon mustard.
          1-1/2 teaspoons salt.
          1/2 tablespoon flour.
          1 tablespoon sugar.
          Few grains cayenne.
          1 tablespoon melted butter.
          1 egg yolk.
          1/3 cup hot vinegar.
          1/2 teaspoon celery seed.
          2/3 cup thick cream.

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients, except celery seed, in the order given.
Cook in double boiler, stirring constantly until mixture coats the
spoon; strain and add celery seed. Chill and add to cabbage.


STEWED RHUBARB

Wash and trim off ends of two pounds tender rhubarb; do not peel. Cut
rhubarb in one-inch pieces. Put into baking dish and sprinkle generously
with sugar, add just enough water to prevent rhubarb from burning. Cover
and bake in oven very slowly until tender but not broken. (Slow cooking
preserves its color.) One cup of Sultana raisins may be cooked with
rhubarb. They must, however, be first picked over, stems removed, then
covered with boiling water, drained, then covered again with boiling
water and cooked until soft. Arrange a layer of rhubarb in baking dish,
then a sprinkle of raisins and sugar and thus continue until all are
used. Finish cooking as directed in the foregoing. Serve very cold.


MARBLE CAKE

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          2 eggs.
          1/2 cup milk.
          1/2 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/2 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1-3/4 cups flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 tablespoon molasses.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, yolks of eggs beaten
until thick and light, flour sifted with baking powder, alternately with
milk. Fold in whites of eggs beaten until stiff. Turn one-third of this
batter into a bowl and add to it molasses and spices. Pour into
well-greased pan, alternating light and dark mixtures to give it the
"marbled" appearance.

Bake forty to forty-five minutes in a moderate oven.




_May_


          "_If you are an artist in the kitchen
          you will always be esteemed._"--_Elizabeth
          in Her German Garden._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _May_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          ASPARAGUS SOUP--SALTINES

          BAKED BLUEFISH √Ä LA CREOLE

          CHATEAU POTATOES      STRINGLESS BEANS WITH BACON

          CHEESE AND PIMENTO SALAD

          FROZEN STRAWBERRIES

          CORN-STARCH LOAF CAKE WITH MAPLE FROSTING

          CAF√â NOIR--TEA FRAPP√â

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF ASPARAGUS SOUP

          3 cups White Stock.
          1 bunch (or 1 can) asparagus.
          2 cups cold water.
          2 slices onion.
          4 tablespoons butter.
          4 tablespoons flour.
          1-1/2 cups scalded milk.
          1/2 cup hot cream.

PROCESS: Wash, scrape and cut asparagus in one-inch pieces, reserve the
tips. Cover with boiling salted water, cook ten minutes; drain, add
stock and onion and cook until tender, rub through a sieve. Melt butter
in a sauce pan, add flour, stir to a smooth paste; remove from fire and
add first mixture slowly, stirring constantly. Season with salt and
pepper, add hot milk and cream, continue stirring. Cook tips in boiling
salted water until tender, drain. Turn soup into hot soup tureen, add
tips and serve. If canned asparagus is used, drain from liquor, rinse,
reserve tips and follow directions given in the foregoing.


BLUEFISH √Ä LA CREOLE

Remove bones from a fresh, three-pound bluefish. Place on a
well-buttered fish sheet, laid in a dripping pan. Sprinkle with salt and
paprika. Cook in a hot oven twenty-five minutes, basting often with
melted butter or sweet dripping. Remove to hot serving platter and pour
a Creole Sauce around fish. Sprinkle fish with buttered crumbs, set
platter on a board and place in oven to brown crumbs. Garnish with
slices of lemon dipped in chopped parsley.

CREOLE SAUCE

(For recipe see Page 122.)


CHATEAU POTATOES

Wash, pare and cook (almost soft) one-half dozen medium-size potatoes.
Drain perfectly dry, cool and cut them in quarters, trim them in the
shape of small gherkins. Wash them in cold water, then put them in a
frying pan, reheat in boiling water. Drain and add four tablespoons
butter; shake the pan until potatoes are well buttered and a golden
brown color. Remove carefully with a skimmer to hot serving dish, and
sprinkle with finely chopped parsley.


STRINGLESS BEANS WITH BACON

Cut three thin slices of bacon in shreds crosswise, try out in a frying
pan. Cook until tender two cups green, stringless beans and three or
four small new onions, in boiling salted water. Drain and add to bacon,
mix well, add salt (if necessary) and pepper; turn into a hot serving
dish.


CHEESE AND PIMENTO SALAD

(For recipe see Page 26.)


FROZEN STRAWBERRIES

          4 cups thin cream.
          3 cups thick cream.
          2 cups milk.
          1 cup sugar.
          1/4 cup water.
          Few grains salt.
          2 cups strawberry juice and pulp.
          1 tablespoon lemon juice.
          Strawberries.

PROCESS: Cook water and sugar together three minutes. Cool and add to
cream and milk. Add a sprinkle of salt. Turn into freezer and when half
frozen add lemon juice and strawberry pulp. Finish freezing. Let stand
an hour or two to ripen. Serve in cone shape and place a large, unhulled
strawberry in top of each cone.


CORN STARCH LOAF CAKE

          2/3 cup Cottolene.
          2 cups fine sugar.
          1 cup milk.
          1 cup corn starch.
          2 cups flour.
          1-1/2 tablespoons baking powder.
          Whites 5 eggs beaten stiff.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon vanilla.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Mix
and sift flour, corn starch, baking powder and salt; add alternately to
first mixture with milk, add vanilla, then cut and fold in whites of
eggs. Turn mixture into two well-greased, brick-shaped bread pans and
bake forty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Spread with Maple Frosting
(see Page 103) and stick with blanched and shredded almonds slightly
toasted.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _May_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF SPINACH      CROUTONS

          YOUNG PIGEONS (STALL FED) STUFFED AND BRAISED

          MASHED POTATOES      ASPARAGUS WITH BUTTER SAUCE

          SPINACH SALAD

          COTTAGE PUDDING WITH STRAWBERRIES

          COFFEE

CREAM OF SPINACH

          1/2 peck spinach.
          6 cups cold water.
          1/2 small bay leaf.
          1-1/2 teaspoons salt.
          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          2 cups milk.
          2 slices onion.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 cup heavy cream.
          Cayenne pepper and celery salt.

PROCESS: Cook spinach in water thirty minutes. Drain, chop, and rub
through sieve. Scald milk with onion and bay leaf. Melt Cottolene in
sauce-pan, add flour, stir to a smooth paste, pour on slowly scalded
milk (first removing onion and bay leaf), stirring constantly. Add
seasonings, spinach pulp; cook five minutes and serve with cream,
whipped stiff. Sprinkle each portion with finely chopped parsley.


YOUNG PIGEONS STUFFED AND BRAISED

Clean, stuff and truss six _young_ pigeons. Arrange them in a stew pan
or Dutch oven. Add one quart boiling water; add three blades celery, cut
in pieces, and three slices of onion, a small bit of bay leaf and
one-half teaspoon peppercorns. Cover closely and simmer (in the oven if
Dutch oven is used) slowly, until birds are tender (about two hours
according to age of birds). Remove from casserole, cool and spread with
soft butter. Sprinkle with salt, pepper, and dredge with flour. Strain
liquor from casserole. Try out fat salt pork in vessel, and brown birds
richly in the pork fat, turning often that they may be evenly browned.
Make a sauce of the strained stock. Make shallow, boat-shape croutons
of stale bread, fry them a golden brown in deep hot Cottolene, drain on
brown paper and arrange a bird in each boat. Garnish with parsley.

STUFFING FOR PIGEONS

          1 cup hot, riced potato.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1 teaspoon finely chopped chives.
          1 tablespoon butter.
          1/4 cup soft stale bread crumbs soaked in water
             then wrung in a napkin.
          1 egg yolk.
          Few grains poultry seasonings.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given and fill body of pigeons.


ASPARAGUS WITH BUTTER SAUCE

Untie the bunches, wash and remove scales. Cut off the hard part of
spears as far up as they will snap. Retie, and cook in boiling salted
water until tender (about fifteen minutes), leaving the tips out of
water the first ten minutes of cooking. Drain, remove strings. Arrange
in hot serving dish and pour over two tablespoons melted butter (for
each bunch), sprinkle with salt and pepper.


SPINACH SALAD

Pick over and wash in several waters or until no sand is left in bottom
of bowl, one-half peck spinach. Drain and cook in its own juice and the
water that clings to the leaves (if spinach is old, cook it in plenty of
water), until soft. Drain dry as possible and chop finely. Season with
salt, pepper and Tarragon vinegar. Cut bacon in shreds crosswise, then
cut shreds in small bits. Saut√© them until delicately browned and crisp,
skim them from the fat, add them to spinach, add one tablespoon of bacon
fat. Butter lightly small Dairole molds and pack solidly with spinach.
Chill, unmold and arrange on thin slices of cold, boiled ham, tongue or
Bologna sausage, trimmed in circular pieces a trifle larger than mold of
spinach. Arrange each portion in a nest of parsley or cress, and fill
depression on top of spinach with Mayonnaise or Sauce Tartare (for
recipe see Page 84).


[Sidenote: _May_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF ASPARAGUS

          BRAISED CALF'S LIVER

          RICE AU GRATIN      CARROTS AND TURNIPS IN CREAM SAUCE

          ASPARAGUS SALAD

          CUSTARD PIE      EDAM CHEESE

          COFFEE

          ICED TEA

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF ASPARAGUS

(For recipe see Page 66.)


BRAISED CALF'S LIVER

Wipe liver and skewer into shape, if necessary. Draw small lardoons
through the liver, in parallel rows, leaving each lardoon extend
one-half inch above surface. Place liver in a casserole or Dutch oven,
surround with remnants of lardoons. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and
dredge with flour. Surround with one-third cup each of carrots, onion
and celery, cut in small cubes; add one-half teaspoon peppercorns, six
cloves, one spray parsley, a bit of bay leaf and two cups hot Brown
Stock or water. Cover closely and cook in a slow oven two hours. Remove
cover the last half hour of cooking that liver may brown richly. Remove
liver to serving platter, set aside in a warm place. Strain liquor in
casserole and use for making a Brown Sauce. Pour sauce around liver and
serve. Braised liver may be served cold, thinly sliced.


RICE AU GRATIN

          1-1/2 cups steamed or boiled rice.
          1 tablespoon salt.
          1-1/2 tablespoons butter.
          1/3 lb. grated cheese.
          Cayenne.
          Milk.
          Buttered cracker crumbs.

PROCESS: When steaming or boiling the rice, allow one tablespoon of salt
for seasoning. Butter a baking dish and cover with a layer of rice, dot
over with some of the butter. Sprinkle with a thin layer of cheese and a
slight sprinkle cayenne; repeat alternate layers until rice and cheese
are used. Pour on milk to half the depth of baking dish, cover with
buttered cracker crumbs and bake in oven until cheese melts and crumbs
are brown.


CARROTS AND TURNIPS IN CREAM SAUCE

Scrub, scrape and cut carrots in small cubes. Wash, pare and cut
purple-top turnips the same. (There should be one and one-half cups of
each.) Cover each (in separate vessels) with boiling water and cook
until tender; add salt the last half hour of cooking. Drain well, toss
together and reheat in one and one-half cups Thin White Sauce.


ASPARAGUS SALAD

Cook asparagus in the usual way, drain and slip three or four spears
through an onion ring just large enough to hold them. Arrange these
fagots in nests of crisp lettuce heart leaves. Just before serving pour
over French Dressing to which has been added one tablespoon of finely
chopped chives. A band of red or green pepper may be used in place of
the onion ring. Canned asparagus should first be drained from the liquor
in the can then rinsed with cold water. Chilled and served as directed
in the foregoing.


CUSTARD PIE

Line a deep, perforated pie tin with Plain or Rich Paste. For filling,
beat three eggs slightly, add one-fourth cup sugar, one-eighth teaspoon
salt, one-eighth teaspoon nutmeg, and pour over slowly two cups scalded
milk, stirring constantly. Bake in a hot oven at first, to set the crust
or rim, then reduce the heat afterwards; as this is a combination of
eggs and milk it should be finished in a slow oven.

[Sidenote: _May_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â--BREAD STICKS

          BOILED CORNED BEEF WITH VEGETABLES

          DANDELION SALAD

          FROZEN STRAWBERRIES

          SPANISH LAYER CAKE

          CAF√â NOIR--ICED TEA

CONSOMM√â WITH BREAD STICKS

(For recipe see Page 149.)


BOILED CORNED BEEF WITH VEGETABLES

Select five or six pounds from the plate or the brisket; wash carefully
in cold water, drain; place in kettle and cover with boiling water, let
boil five minutes and--if very briny--drain, rinse off scum with hot
water and again cover with boiling water; heat to boiling point and
simmer until meat is tender (about six hours). Remove beef from liquor,
keep covered in a warm place. Skim off some of the fat from liquor. Add
carrots washed, scraped and cut in quarters. Let cook fifteen minutes,
then add small white onions and turnips pared and cut in quarters, one
head white cabbage cut in quarters (stalk cut out). Wash, pare and cut
uniform-sized potatoes in quarters, parboil five minutes, then drain and
add to other ingredients. Cook beets in a separate vessel. When
vegetables are soft, arrange meat in center of hot serving platter and
surround with carrots, turnips, onions and cabbage. Sprinkle vegetables
with finely chopped parsley, serve beets in separate dish. Pass
horseradish, mustard and vinegar.


DANDELION SALAD

Gather the dandelion when young and tender. That which is cultivated is
well bleached and very tender. Wash thoroughly in several waters, cut
off the roots and outside leaves. Drain dry on a cloth or in a wire
basket. Arrange in salad bowl. Cut thin sweet bacon in tiny shreds
crosswise and saut√© in frying pan until crisp; sprinkle bacon over
dandelion. To the fat in pan (there should be one-third cup), add
one-fourth cup vinegar diluted with two tablespoons water. Heat to
boiling point and pour over dandelions; toss leaves with a fork until
well mixed with dressing; serve at once.


FROZEN STRAWBERRIES--No. 2

          2 quarts cream.
          2 cups sugar.
          Few grains salt.
          2 cups strawberry juice and pulp.

PROCESS: Wash and hull strawberries (about three boxes); sprinkle with
one cup sugar, cover closely and set aside in a cool place for two
hours. Mash and squeeze berries through cheese cloth. Mix remaining cup
sugar and salt with cream; turn into freezer and, when half frozen, add
strawberries and finish freezing. Serve with Strawberry Sauce.

STRAWBERRY SAUCE

          1 cup sugar.
          1/3 cup water.
          2 cups strawberry pulp.

PROCESS: Make a syrup by boiling water with sugar three minutes (after
mixture begins to boil), cool slightly and add strawberry pulp. Chill
thoroughly and serve.


SPANISH LAYER CAKE

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          Yolks 2 eggs.
          1/2 cup milk.
          1-7/8 cups pastry flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/4 teaspoon cloves.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          Whites 2 eggs.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Mix
and sift flour, baking powder, spices and salt; add to first mixture
alternately with milk. Cut and fold in stiffly beaten whites of eggs.
Bake in two well-greased, square, layer cake pans. Spread with a thick
layer of raspberry between layers. Cover top with frosting or dredge
with powdered sugar.

[Sidenote: _May_

_Fifth Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF RICE SOUP

          FLANK STEAK STUFFED AND BRAISED

          BOILED RICE      DANDELION GREENS WITH BACON

          ASPARAGUS SALAD

          STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE

          CAF√â NOIR

CREAM OF RICE SOUP

          1 cup rice, well washed.
          1-1/2 quarts cold water.
          1 onion sliced.
          1 green pepper cut in shreds.
          2 cups hot cream or milk.
          1/4 cup butter.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          Salt, cayenne and nutmeg.
          1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.

PROCESS: Heat water to boiling, season with salt and add rice, onion and
green pepper (discarding seeds and veins). Cook until rice is soft; rub
through a sieve. Melt butter in a saucepan, add flour, stir to a smooth
paste, add cream slowly, stirring constantly. Add seasonings and cook
over hot water ten minutes. Combine with rice mixture, continue cooking
five minutes. Turn into hot soup tureen and sprinkle over with parsley.


FLANK STEAK STUFFED AND BRAISED

Select a flank steak weighing about two and one-half pounds. Have the
butcher peel off the superfluous fat and tissue and score both sides
diagonally in opposite directions. Remove the steak from paper when it
comes from market and lay it flat on meat board, sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Spread over it a thin layer of stuffing, (see Page 154), roll
lengthwise, very compactly, sew the overlapping edge securely, also the
ends. Sprinkle roll with salt, pepper and dredge with flour. Place meat
in pan with enough Cottolene to brown it richly, turning roll until it
is richly browned all over. Then remove to Dutch oven or casserole;
rinse dripping pan with a little boiling water, pour over meat and
surround with two cups stewed and strained tomato pulp, one onion thinly
sliced, one green pepper shredded (after removing seeds and veins), two
sprays parsley, the half of a small bay leaf and two tablespoons
Worcestershire sauce. Cover closely, place in oven and cook meat very
slowly about three to four hours. Remove meat to serving platter. Dilute
four tablespoons flour with cold water to the consistency to pour, add
to sauce in pan, stir until well blended, season with salt and pepper;
let simmer ten minutes, then strain around meat. Garnish with sprays of
parsley or cress.


DANDELION GREENS

Remove the roots, carefully pick over (discarding all tough and wilted
leaves) and wash dandelion leaves in several waters; to the last water
add salt to free leaves from insects and vermin. It will require one
peck of leaves to serve a family of six. Cook leaves in plenty of
boiling salted water until tender; drain at once and chop fine. Dress
with butter and pepper; cut thin slices of bacon in shreds crosswise,
try it out and pour over dandelions. (There should be one-third cup
bacon fat.) The shreds of bacon are an attractive garnish; hard-cooked
eggs may also be used as a garnish. Cut them in eighths or rings.
Vinegar is sometimes added. Serve hot.


STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE

(For recipe see Page 59.)




_June_


          _Nothing lovelier can be found
           In woman, than to study house good._
                                     --_Milton._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _June_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â      BROWNED CRACKERS

          LAMB CHOPS BREADED--MA√éTRE D'H√îTEL BUTTER

          NEW POTATOES      CHIVE SAUCE

          GREEN PEAS

          JUNE SALAD

          CHERRY PIE

          ICED TEA--CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSOMM√â PRINCESS

Add to Consomm√© small green peas and tiny cubes of cold cooked breast of
chicken. (For recipe for Consomm√© see Page 149.)


BROWNED CRACKERS

Split crackers, arrange them in a dripping pan, place in a moderate oven
until crisp and delicately browned.


LAMB CHOPS BREADED

Prepare loin or French chops as for broiling. Dip in crumbs, egg
(diluted with cold water, allowing two tablespoons water to each egg),
add in crumbs, and fry in deep hot Cottolene six to eight minutes. Drain
on brown paper and spread with Ma√Ætre d'H√¥tel Butter.


NEW POTATOES WITH CHIVE SAUCE

Scrape off the skin, remove the "eyes" with a sharp pointed knife and
scrub them with a vegetable brush, rinse thoroughly and put in sauce
pan, add boiling water to cover; season with salt, cover and cook until
soft, drain. If small, serve whole; if large, cut them in one-half inch
cubes and reheat in Chive Sauce.


CHIVE SAUCE

To Cream Sauce (see Page 151) add one tablespoon finely chopped Chives.


GREEN PEAS

Cook peas in boiling water. Use just enough water to prevent them from
burning. Add salt fifteen minutes before removing them from fire. Season
with butter and pepper.


JUNE SALAD

Remove stones from red and pink Ox-heart cherries and cut them in halves
lengthwise. Remove the pulp from oranges and cut in inch cubes; peel
bananas and cut in one-half inch cubes. Use equal quantities of each and
marinate with French Dressing No. 2. Serve in nests of heart lettuce
leaves and mask with Mayonnaise.

FRENCH DRESSING No. 2

          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          4 tablespoons Olive oil.
          1/8 teaspoon paprika.
          2 tablespoons lemon juice.

PROCESS: Put seasoning in small bowl, add oil slowly, stirring
constantly; add lemon juice slowly, continue beating until all is used.
Chill, beat again and turn over fruit.

MAYONNAISE DRESSING

          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains cayenne.
          Yolks 2 eggs.
          1-1/2 tablespoons lemon juice, or
          3/4 tablespoon each of vinegar and lemon juice.
          3/4 cup Olive oil.

PROCESS: Put seasoning in bowl, add egg yolks and mix thoroughly, add
oil drop by drop, until four tablespoons have been added, after which
larger quantities may be added. Stir constantly. As mixture thickens,
add a teaspoon lemon juice or vinegar. Continue adding oil and lemon
juice or vinegar alternately until all is used, stirring constantly. All
ingredients should be very cold. Set bowl in which dressing is made in a
bowl of crushed ice.


CHERRY PIE

Pick over, stem and pit cherries (there should be two cups when pitted).
Heat to boiling point in their own juice, then chill them. Line a
perforated pie pan with Rich Paste, moisten the rim with cold water and
lay around a strip of pastry one inch wide, press lightly. Brush the
pastry over with slightly beaten white of egg. Sweeten cherries to
taste, add a few grains of salt and turn into lined pie pan. Sift over
two tablespoons flour, moisten rim and cover with top crust, flute the
edges and bake in hot oven for the first ten minutes, then reduce heat,
continue baking for twenty-five minutes. Serve hot with cheese, cut in
strips one-fourth inch thick and wide by two and one-half inches long.


ICED TEA

Make tea and chill. Serve in glasses filled with crushed ice, adding (if
desired) one tablespoon lemon juice to each glass. Pass fine granulated
(Bar) sugar. Place each glass on a small plate.

[Illustration]


[Sidenote: _June_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CHEESE CANAP√âS

          HAMBURG ROAST--BROWN SAUCE

          ROAST NEW POTATOES

          GREEN PEAS WITH NEW CARROTS IN CREAM SAUCE

          GARDEN CRESS WITH ORANGES--FRENCH DRESSING

          CURRANT PIE

          COFFEE      CHERRY PUNCH

       *       *       *       *       *

CHEESE CANAP√âS

Cut stale bread in one-quarter inch slices, shape with small biscuit
cutter (2 inches in diameter). Spread lightly with French or German
mustard, sprinkle thickly with grated cheese, sprinkle cheese with
finely chopped olives. Place a small stuffed olive in center of each.
Dispose on a small plate covered with a paper doily. Garnish with sprays
of parsley and serve as an "appetizer."


HAMBURG ROAST

Remove the fat and stringy parts, also marrow-bone, from two pounds
round steak. Pass through the meat grinder twice; add the marrow taken
from bone, one tablespoon green pepper finely chopped, one tablespoon
onion finely chopped, season well with salt and the beaten yolks of two
eggs or one whole egg slightly beaten; add one-half cup of soft bread
crumbs that have been soaked in cold water thirty minutes and wrung dry
in a double cheese cloth. Mix ingredients thoroughly with the hand.
Shape in a compact roll of uniform thickness. Lay thin slices of salt
pork or bacon in the bottom of a dripping pan, set the roast on them;
lay thin slices of salt pork over the meat and place in a hot oven.
After the first eight minutes reduce the heat and baste with the hot
fat in the pan; let cook about thirty minutes, basting every ten
minutes. The roast should be richly browned on the outside and a
delicate pink inside. Serve surrounded with Tomato, Brown or Creole
Sauce.

BROWN SAUCE

          2 tablespoons butter.
          1 slice onion.
          4 tablespoons flour.
          1-1/2 cups Brown Stock.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.

PROCESS: Melt butter in sauce pan, add onion and cook until delicately
browned; remove onion, and cook butter until richly browned, stirring
constantly; add flour sifted with seasonings, stir to a paste and
continue browning. Then pour on stock, slowly stirring until smooth and
glossy. Onion may be omitted.


ROAST NEW POTATOES

Select uniform-sized new potatoes, wash and scrub them with a brush,
pare and parboil ten to fifteen minutes (according to the size) in
boiling salted water. Drain and place them around rack in dripping pan
in which meat is roasting and cook until tender. Baste occasionally with
fat in pan when basting roast.


GREEN PEAS AND NEW CARROTS IN CREAM SAUCE

Cook one and one-half cups of peas in just enough water to prevent them
from burning. Add salt fifteen minutes before removing them from range.

Wash, scrub and scrape new carrots and cut them in one-fourth inch cubes
(there should be one and one-half cups); cook in boiling salted water
until tender. Drain and mix with peas. Reheat them in one and one-half
cups of Cream Sauce (for recipe see Page 151).


GARDEN CRESS WITH ORANGES

Arrange individual nests of Garden Cress on six chilled salad plates.
Cut eight oranges in halves, remove the pulp, discarding veins and
sections. Leave the pulp in the original shape as taken from the
sections; divide the pulp evenly between the six nests. Serve with
French Dressing and sprinkle each portion with paprika and a few grains
cayenne. Omit the garlic when using fruit.

FRENCH DRESSING

          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1/4 teaspoon paprika.
          6 tablespoons olive oil.
          2 tablespoons vinegar.
          Garlic.

PROCESS: Rub the mixing bowl with a bruised clove of garlic; add salt,
pepper, paprika and oil; beat until ingredients are thoroughly blended,
adding vinegar slowly meanwhile. A piece of ice put into bowl while
stirring will aid in chilling the mixture.


CURRANT PIE

          2-1/2 cups cleaned currants.
          2 cups sugar.
          1/8 teaspoon salt.
          2 eggs slightly beaten.
          2 tablespoons flour.

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients in the order given. Turn in a lined pie
pan, heaping currants in center; cover with top crust, press and flute
the edges. Bake as other berry pies. Serve hot. Sprinkle with powdered
sugar.


CHERRY PUNCH

Boil two cups sugar and one cup water until a rich syrup is formed. Add
one cup of lemon juice and two cups of Cherry juice, left over when
canning cherries. (This left-over juice may be brought to the boiling
point, skimmed and turned into sterilized fruit jars, sealed and stored
as canned fruit and may be used for punch or pudding sauce.) Add two
cups cold water. Fill a claret pitcher with cracked ice; add mixture.
When serving, place a thin slice of orange, three or four strawberries
and three pitted California cherries in each glass, fill three-fourths
full with mixture. Serve very cold.


[Sidenote: _June_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          CHICKEN CONSOMM√â WITH POACHED EGG YOLKS

          FRIED PERCH--SAUCE TARTARE

          SHREDDED POTATOES      ASPARAGUS ON TOAST

          LETTUCE WITH CREAM DRESSING

          CHERRY ROLY-POLY      CHERRY SAUCE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICKEN CONSOMM√â WITH POACHED EGG YOLKS

Heat six cups of Chicken Consomm√© to the boiling point. Poach the yolks
of six eggs in hot water until firm; remove from water with a skimmer.
Place one yolk in each Bouillon cup and pour on hot consomm√©. Sprinkle
slightly with finely chopped chives or parsley.


FRIED PERCH

Select fresh perch of medium size. Clean, bone and wipe dry as possible.
Sprinkle with salt, pepper, dip in flour, egg, and crumbs (be sure fish
are well coated with crumbs). Lay three at a time in a croquette basket
and fry a golden brown in deep hot Cottolene. Cottolene should not be so
hot as to brown fish at once, as fish will not be cooked through. (Time
required for frying small fish is from four to six minutes.) Drain on
brown paper and serve with Sauce Tartare. Garnish with parsley, lemon
slices and radishes cut to imitate roses.

SAUCE TARTARE

To one cup of Mayonnaise Dressing add one finely chopped shallot, one
tablespoon each finely chopped capers, sweet gherkins, olives, and
one-half tablespoon each finely chopped parsley and fresh tarragon. Mix
well and keep cool until ready to serve.


SHREDDED POTATOES

Wash, pare and cut potatoes in one-eighth inch slices. Cut slices in
tiny straws. Wash carefully in cold water until water ceases to be
cloudy. Let stand one hour in cold water. Drain and dry on towels. Fry a
golden brown in deep hot Cottolene. Drain on brown paper, sprinkle with
salt and serve around fried perch.


ASPARAGUS TIPS IN CROUSTADES

Prepare the asparagus in the usual way, cut off the tops one inch in
length. Cook in as little boiling salted water as possible. Drain and
dress with a B√©chamel Sauce. Serve in Bread Croustades (small round,
square, or diamond-shaped molds cut through thick slices of bread).

B√âCHAMEL SAUCE

          4 tablespoons butter.
          4 tablespoons flour.
          1-1/2 cups highly seasoned chicken stock.
          1/2 cup hot thin cream.
          Yolk 2 eggs.
          Salt, pepper, few grains nutmeg.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a saucepan, add flour, stir to a smooth paste;
add stock slowly, stirring constantly; add cream and continue stirring.
Bring to boiling point, remove from range and add egg yolk slightly
beaten. Add seasonings. Beat until smooth and glossy. Keep hot over hot
water. Do not allow sauce to boil after adding yolk of egg.


LETTUCE WITH CREAM DRESSING

Pick over, wash thoroughly young tender lettuce; cut off the roots and
drain. Beat one-half cup heavy cream until solid. Add two tablespoons
vinegar diluted with one tablespoon cold water. Add one tablespoon
finely chopped chives, one-half teaspoon salt and one-eighth teaspoon
pepper. Pour over lettuce, mix well and serve cold.


CHERRY ROLY-POLY

Make a baking powder biscuit dough as for Cream Fruit Rolls. (See Page
180.) Roll to one-half inch thickness. Drain pitted cherries from the
juice; strew them over dough, sprinkle with sugar and dredge lightly
with flour. Roll like a jelly roll, moisten and press the overlapping
edge and close the ends as securely as possible. Bake in a hot oven,
twenty-five minutes, basting three times with some of the cherry juice
sweetened to taste, or tie loosely in a floured cloth and cook in
boiling water two hours, or steam in a steamer one hour. Serve on a hot
platter with Cherry Sauce.

CHERRY SAUCE

          2 cups pitted cherries.
          1 cup claret.
          2/3 cup sugar.
          1/2 glass red currant jelly.
          Juice 1 lemon.
          1/2 dozen Cassia buds.

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients in the order given, cook slowly until
reduced to a syrup. Strain through a sieve and serve hot with Cherry
Roly-Poly or Dumplings.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _June_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF ASPARAGUS SOUP--CROUTONS

          RADISHES      GREEN ONIONS

          ROAST STUFFED SHOULDER OF LAMB--MINT SAUCE

          NEW POTATOES WITH PEAS

          SWISS CHARD WITH BACON AND "HARD BOILED" EGGS

          CHERRY DUFF      CHERRY SAUCE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF ASPARAGUS SOUP

(For recipe see Page 66.)


CROUTONS

Cut stale bread in one-third inch slices; remove crusts and cut in
one-third inch strips, cut strips in one-third inch cubes. Fry them a
golden brown in deep hot Cottolene. Drain on brown paper and sprinkle
lightly with salt.


ROAST SHOULDER OF LAMB

Order a shoulder and fore-leg of lamb, boned. Wipe, stuff and truss in
shape. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and dredge with flour. Place on rack
in dripping pan, put in hot oven and baste with dripping melted in one
cup hot water, as soon as flour begins to brown; continue basting every
fifteen minutes until meat is done, which will require about two hours;
add one cup of stock to pan while meat is cooking. When richly browned
cover closely and finish cooking.

To carve a boned leg of lamb, cut in thin slices across the grain,
beginning at top of shoulder. When trussed in shape meat looks like a
goose without wings or legs.

STUFFING FOR LAMB

(See recipe Page 154 for stuffing, adding 3/4 teaspoon poultry
seasoning.)

MINT SAUCE

          1 bunch of mint finely chopped.
          1/3 cup vinegar.
          2 tablespoons cold water.
          2 tablespoons powdered sugar.

PROCESS: Dilute vinegar with cold water, add sugar and stir until sugar
is dissolved, pour over mint (there should be four tablespoons of mint),
place on back of range and infuse for one-half hour.


NEW POTATOES WITH NEW PEAS

Prepare potatoes as for New Potatoes with Chive Sauce (see recipe Page
78), omitting the Chives. Cook one cup of new peas until tender, in as
little boiling salted water as possible. Drain; add to potatoes. Reheat
potatoes and peas in Cream Sauce.


SWISS CHARD WITH BACON

Wash and pick over Swiss Chard. Cook in boiling salted water, using just
enough water to prevent Chard from burning. Drain and chop fine. Arrange
in a mound on a chop platter, surround (crown fashion) with
"hard-boiled" eggs cut in halves lengthwise, having cut side out. Cut a
slice off the large end of each egg so that they will stay in place. Cut
five slices of bacon in narrow strips crosswise. Try out one-third cup.
Add one-fourth cup vinegar, diluted with one-fourth cup hot water, pour
while hot over the Swiss Chard, scattering the scraps of bacon over top
of mound.


CHERRY DUFF

          4 cups pitted cherries.
          2 cups sugar.
          1 teaspoon lemon juice.
          1-1/2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          2 cups flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          3/4 cup milk or thin cream.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt; rub Cottolene in
lightly with the tips of fingers; add milk and mix to soft dough. Put
sugar, cherries, drained from juice, and lemon juice in bottom of
well-greased baking dish. Cover with dough, place in steamer, set over
kettle of boiling water, lay a crash towel over steamer, replace cover,
and steam pudding forty-five minutes. Serve with cherry juice, thickened
with arrow root and sweetened.




_July_


          _I'm quite ashamed--'tis mighty rude
           To eat so much--but all's so good!_
                                        --_Pope._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _July_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          COLD CONSOMM√â

          VEAL LOAF (HOT)--TOMATO SAUCE

          (OR)

          COLD--WITH STRING BEAN SALAD

          SARATOGA CHIPS      BEETS IN DRAWN BUTTER

          FIGS IN SHERRY JELLY WITH WHIPPED CREAM

          NUT AND RAISIN CAKE WITH CARAMEL FROSTING

          ICED COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICKEN CONSOMM√â (COLD)

Place a four-pound fowl in stock pot and a small knuckle of veal; add
four quarts of cold water and heat slowly to boiling point. Skim, reduce
heat and let simmer five hours. Do not allow liquid to boil as it will
destroy its gelatinous properties, and the stock will be turbid. The
last hour of cooking add one-third cup each celery, carrot and turnip
cut in small dice, one-third cup sliced onion, one teaspoon peppercorns,
one tablespoon salt, three sprays thyme, one spray marjoram, two sprays
parsley, one-half bay leaf. Remove fowl and knuckle; strain soup through
double cheese cloth, cool quickly, and remove all fat; clear. Fill
Bouillon cups three-fourths full and chill. This should be a clear,
savory jelly.

TO CLEAR SOUP STOCK

After straining the stock through double cheese cloth, remove all fat
and put the stock into a four-quart stew-pan. Place on range and allow
the white and shell of one egg for each quart of stock. Beat the eggs
slightly and crush shells in small bits, add slowly to stock, stirring
constantly but slowly until the boiling point is reached; let boil two
minutes. Reduce the heat so that stock barely simmers twenty minutes,
skim and strain through double cheese cloth placed over fine soup
strainer. If stock to be cleared is not sufficiently seasoned, add more
seasoning before clearing.


VEAL LOAF

Wipe three pounds of lean veal, discarding all skin and tissue. Pass
meat through the meat-chopper twice, with one-half pound of salt pork;
add six crackers rolled, one-fourth cup cream, juice of one small lemon
(about two tablespoons), one tablespoon salt, one-half tablespoon black
pepper, onion juice to taste. Mix thoroughly and pack solidly in a
granite, brick-shaped bread pan, spread top evenly and brush with
slightly beaten white of egg. Bake in a moderate oven three hours,
basting often with one-fourth cup of pork fat or dripping diluted with
one-fourth cup boiling water. Prick surface with a fork that fat may
penetrate meat. Chill, remove to serving platter, surround by any good
vegetable salad. If served hot, surround with Tomato, Creole or
Espagnole Sauce. This may be prepared Saturday.


STRING BEAN SALAD

Marinate cold, cooked, stringless beans with French Dressing. There
should be enough beans to make a generous border around a cold veal
loaf. Sprinkle beans thickly with small onions thinly sliced and the
rings separated. Garnish edge of dish with sprays of parsley and
Nasturtium blossoms. The finely chopped seed-cells may also be sprinkled
over beans and is quite an addition.


SARATOGA CHIPS

Wash and pare the desired number of uniform-sized potatoes. Slice thinly
(using slaw cutter) into a bowl of cold water. Let stand several hours,
changing the water often or until it is quite clear. Drain and drop them
into a kettle of boiling water; allow them to boil just one minute.
Drain quickly and cover with cold water. Drain from cold water and dry
between towels. Fry a few at a time in deep hot Cottolene, keeping them
moving with the skimmer. Drain on soft brown paper and sprinkle with
salt.


BEETS IN DRAWN BUTTER

Wash the small new beets and cook in boiling salted water until tender.
Drain and cover with cold water. Rub off the skins and slice them or cut
them in cubes. Reheat them in

DRAWN BUTTER (SOUR SAUCE)

Melt two tablespoons butter in a sauce-pan; add three tablespoons flour,
stir to a smooth paste and add gradually, while stirring constantly, one
cup boiling water. Boil two minutes, then add four tablespoons hot cream
and four tablespoons vinegar (if vinegar is too acid use two tablespoons
each of vinegar and water), season with salt and pepper.


FIGS IN SHERRY JELLY

          1 tablespoon granulated gelatine.
          1/4 cup cold water.
          3/4 cup boiling water.
          1/2 cup best table Sherry wine.
          Juice of 1 small lemon.
          1/2 dozen washed figs.
          Whipped Cream.
          1/2 cup sugar.

PROCESS: Soak gelatine in cold water, then dissolve it in boiling water;
add sugar and stir occasionally until mixture begins to thicken, then
add wine and lemon juice. Chill a pint mold in ice water (a fancy mold
is attractive for this purpose). Separate the figs, slice them thinly
and dip some of them in the jelly and use them for decorating the mold;
then fill the mold with alternate layers of sliced figs and the mixture,
allowing the jelly to "set" each time before adding the slices of figs.
Chill thoroughly. Unmold jelly on serving dish and surround with whipped
cream sweetened and flavored as desired. Use pastry bag and rose tube
for this purpose.


NUT AND RAISIN CAKE

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup fine sugar.
          3 eggs unbeaten.
          1 cup pecan nut meats.
          2/3 cup raisins.
          2 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          3/4 cup milk.
          Grated rind of half an orange.
          1/2 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/4 teaspoon mace.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly, add
eggs, one at a time and beating each in thoroughly before adding
another. Pass nuts and raisins through meat chopper, then mix with flour
sifted with baking powder, salt and spices; add alternately to first
mixture with milk, beating constantly. Turn mixture into a well-greased
tube pan and bake thirty-five to forty minutes in a moderate oven.
Spread with

CARAMEL FROSTING WITH NUTS

          1-1/4 cups soft brown sugar.
          1/4 cup granulated sugar.
          1/2 cup boiling water.
          Whites 2 eggs.
          1/2 teaspoon almond extract.
          1/2 cup pecan nut meats broken in pieces.

PROCESS: Boil sugar and water together as for Boiled Frosting (see
recipe Page 56). Pour slowly onto beaten whites of eggs, beating
constantly, continue beating until frosting is nearly cool. Put pan
containing frosting in a larger vessel of boiling water, place on range
and cook until mixture granulates around sides of pan, stir constantly
while cooking. Remove from hot water and beat until frosting will keep
its shape when dropped from spoon. Add nut meats and flavoring. Spread
on cake, using wooden spoon to give surface a wave-like appearance.


ICED COFFEE

Follow directions for making Boiled Coffee, using four cups boiling
water. Chill and serve in tall glasses filled with cracked ice; add
cream and sugar.

[Sidenote: _July_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â WITH VEGETABLES

          BAKED STUFFED BLACK BASS--EGG SAUCE

          PARSLEY POTATOES      CAULIFLOWER WITH CHEESE SAUCE

          THIN CORN BREAD

          TOMATO AND ONION SALAD

          STEAMED BLUEBERRY PUDDING--FOAMY SAUCE

          ICED TEA      CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSOMM√â WITH VEGETABLES

To six cups Consomm√© (for recipe see Page 149) add French string beans
cut in diamonds, carrots cooked and cut in tiny fancy shapes (using
French vegetable cutters), and French peas. Serve with toasted Cheese
Crackers.


BAKED BLACK BASS

Clean a four-pound Black Bass, pickerel or haddock, sprinkle with salt,
stuff and sew with No. 8 cotton thread. Cut four or five diagonal gashes
on each side of backbone and lay in strips of fat salt pork. Have the
gashes on one side come between gashes on the other. The fish may be
skewered in the shape of the letter S, or placed in an upright position
on a well-greased fish sheet, laid in the bottom of a dripping-pan.
Brush over with melted butter and sprinkle with salt and pepper, dredge
with flour and strew small pieces of fat pork around fish. Bake one hour
in a hot oven, basting every ten minutes, first with melted butter or
dripping, then with fat in dripping-pan as it is tried out. Dispose on
hot serving platter, pour around Egg Sauce and garnish with sprays of
parsley.

STUFFING FOR FISH

          1/2 cup cracker crumbs.
          1 cup stale bread crumbs.
          5 tablespoons butter.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1/2 cup hot water.
          Onion juice.

PROCESS: Mix crumbs, add seasoning, melt butter and hot water, add to
crumbs, toss lightly with a fork and add onion juice to taste.


EGG SAUCE

To Drawn Butter Sauce add one-half teaspoon Anchovy Essence and two
hard-cooked eggs cut in thin slices. Sprinkle all with finely chopped
parsley. (For Drawn Butter Sauce see Page 92.)


THIN CORN BREAD

          3/4 cup yellow corn meal.
          1-1/4 cups flour.
          2 tablespoons sugar.
          5 teaspoons baking powder.
          3/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup thin cream.
          1 egg well beaten.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.

PROCESS: Mix and sift the dry ingredients; add cream, beaten egg and
Cottolene, beat thoroughly; bake in a well-greased, shallow pan, in a
hot oven, twenty-five minutes; five minutes before removing from oven,
brush over with melted butter or milk to give it a richer color. Serve
with baked or broiled fish.


PARSLEY POTATOES

Select smooth, uniform-sized new potatoes; wash, scrape and cover with
cold water. Let stand one hour; drain and place in steamer, cover
closely and steam until soft. Remove to serving dish; dot over with bits
of butter and sprinkle at once with coarse salt and finely chopped
parsley.


CAULIFLOWER WITH CHEESE SAUCE

Select a medium-sized, firm cauliflower. Trim off leaves, cut off stalk,
and soak one hour (head down) in cold salt water to cover. Cook (head
up) until soft but not broken (about thirty minutes) in boiling salted
water. Drain and place carefully in a buttered, shallow baking dish,
pour over one and one-half cups of Cheese Sauce, sprinkle with buttered
crumbs and place in oven until crumbs are browned. Serve in baking
dish.

CHEESE SAUCE

          3 tablespoons butter.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          Few grains cayenne.
          1-1/2 cups hot milk.
          1/2 cup cheese cut in small pieces.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add flour, mixed with seasonings,
stir to a smooth paste; let cook one minute, stirring constantly. Pour
on gradually hot milk and beat until smooth and glossy. Add cheese and
when melted pour over cauliflower.


TOMATO AND ONION SALAD

Arrange a nest of heart lettuce leaves in salad bowl; place in center
three peeled and chilled tomatoes, cut in quarters; thinly slice a mild
onion, separate the rings and strew them over tomatoes, sprinkle all
with green and red peppers finely chopped. Serve with French Dressing.


STEAMED BLUEBERRY PUDDING

          2-1/8 cups bread flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1 cup milk.
          1 cup blueberries.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt; rub in Cottolene
with tips of fingers, add milk gradually, stirring constantly; turn on a
floured board, knead slightly, then roll out to one-half inch thickness;
place berries in center mixed with one-half teaspoon salt and two
tablespoons sugar; fold dough over, pinch the edges together to form a
large ball; lift carefully into a well-greased, two-quart pail, cover
closely and steam one and one-half hours. Serve with

FOAMY SAUCE

          2 egg whites.
          1 cup sugar.
          3/4 cup thin hot cream.
          1 tablespoon Sherry Wine.
          Nutmeg.

PROCESS: Beat the whites of eggs until stiff, add sugar gradually,
beating constantly. Add hot cream slowly, continue beating. Add Sherry
wine and a sprinkle of nutmeg. Milk may be used in place of cream, if
the latter is not available.

[Sidenote: _July_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          TOMATO BOUILLON--CHEESED BUTTER THINS

          RADISHES      PICKLES

          COLD BOILED TONGUE      CHILI SAUCE

          POTATO SALAD--BROILED TOMATOES

          BLUEBERRY PIE--CHEESE BALLS

          ICED CAF√â AU LAIT

          ICED COCOA

       *       *       *       *       *

TOMATO BOUILLON

Prepare a tomato sauce; there should be two cups. Strain this while hot
through one thickness of cheese cloth into six cups of hot Bouillon.
Reheat and serve in Bouillon cups with


CHEESED BUTTER THINS

Sprinkle Butter Thins lightly with grated cheese, seasoned with salt and
a few grains cayenne. Place in the oven until crackers are crisp and
cheese is melted.


BOILED TONGUE

Wash and clean the tongue, cover with boiling water, to which add
one-third cup each carrots, turnips and onion cut in dice; two sprays
each parsley and thyme, one-half teaspoon peppercorns and one-half dozen
cloves. Simmer until tongue is tender. Let cool in liquor in which it
was cooked, remove the skin and brush with melted butter. Cover with
fine, buttered bread crumbs, after arranging in dripping pan. Bake
twenty minutes, basting often with hot stock or port wine. Chill and
slice thinly; garnish with triangles of buttered toast sprinkled with
finely chopped parsley.


CHILI SAUCE

          2 dozen ripe tomatoes.
          1 dozen onions finely chopped.
          1 dozen peppers finely chopped.
          1 cup brown sugar.
          4 cups cider vinegar.
          4 tablespoons salt.

PROCESS: Scald, peel and chop tomatoes; then add remaining ingredients
in the order given. Place on range, bring to boiling point and cook
slowly until thick. Add more salt and sugar if necessary. Turn into
sterilized fruit jars, seal and store. Serve with meats, fish, etc.


POTATO SALAD

Cut balls from raw potatoes, using a French vegetable cutter. There
should be three cups. Cook potato balls with three slices of onion in
boiling salted water until tender. Drain, chill and marinate with French
Dressing, then cover with Boiled Dressing. Arrange in a mound on serving
platter, surrounded with a border of nasturtium blossoms and leaves.
Sprinkle top with finely chopped chives.

BOILED SALAD DRESSING

          1/4 cup butter.
          1-1/4 teaspoons salt.
          1 teaspoon mustard.
          1/4 teaspoon paprika.
          1 tablespoon sugar.
          Yolks 4 eggs.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1/4 cup vinegar diluted with 2 tablespoons water.
          1 cup cream.

PROCESS: Melt butter in sauce-pan; add flour mixed with seasonings, add
egg yolks slightly beaten and vinegar and water. Cook over hot water
until mixture thickens. Cool. Whip cream and fold into mixture. Beat
well, chill and serve with potato salad.


BROILED TOMATOES

Cut firm, ripe tomatoes in halves, crosswise. Rub each half lightly with
a clove of garlic, sprinkle with salt, pepper, and fine, buttered bread
crumbs mixed with a tablespoon of sugar. Place in a well-buttered
broiler and broil five minutes. Remove carefully to a well-buttered
shallow ramekin, dot over with bits of butter, finish cooking in the
oven, and serve.


BLUEBERRY PIE

Line a deep, perforated pie tin with Plain Paste; brush over with white
of egg slightly beaten. Fill with three cups blueberries mixed with one
cup sugar, two tablespoons flour, one tablespoon butter cut in bits,
one-eighth teaspoon salt, one tablespoon lemon juice. Wet edges, cover
with crust, flute the rim and bake thirty-five minutes in a hot oven at
first to set the crust, then reduce the heat and finish baking.


CHEESE BALLS

Rub to a paste one roll Neufchatel cheese; to this add one-half cup
chopped pecan meats and one-half teaspoon finely chopped, mild red
pepper; season with salt and roll with the "butter paddles" in small
balls the size of Queen olives. Serve with berry or cherry pies.


ICED CAF√â AU LAIT

          1 cup medium ground coffee.
          White 1 egg.
          3 cups boiling water.
          3 cups scalded milk.
          1 cup cold water.

PROCESS: Scald enameled coffee pot. Beat white of egg slightly. Dilute
with one-half cup cold water, mix with coffee, turn into coffee pot and
add boiling water, stir until well mixed. Place on range and let boil
five minutes. Stir down and pour some into a cup to clear the spout of
grounds. Return to pot and add remaining half cup of cold water. Place
on back of range for ten minutes, where it will keep hot but not boil.
After removing coffee to back of range, put milk into double boiler and,
when scalded, pour the two together in another scalded coffee pot. Chill
and serve.

[Sidenote: _July_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          WATERMELON WITH SHERRY SAUCE

          CONSOMM√â PRINTANIERE--IMPERIAL RINGS

          STUFFED HEARTS WITH VEGETABLES

          POTATO PUFF

          CABBAGE SALAD

          RASPBERRY WHIP--WHITE NUT CAKE

          ICED COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

WATERMELON WITH SHERRY SAUCE

Scoop balls out of the center of watermelon using French potato cutter.
Pour over Sherry Sauce and place them carefully in a freezer, packed in
salt and ice, let stand until thoroughly chilled (about one and a half
hours). Serve with Sherry Sauce in tall champagne glasses.

SHERRY SAUCE

Cook one cup sugar with one-fourth cup of water three minutes. Cool
slightly and add one-half cup Sherry, three tablespoons Sloe gin and a
sprinkle of salt. Chill and pour over watermelon balls.


CONSOMM√â PRINTANIERE

To one quart of Chicken Consomm√© add one tablespoon each of cooked
carrot and turnip, cut in small fancy shapes (using French vegetable
cutter for this purpose), small peas, French beans and asparagus tips.
Heat these vegetables in a small quantity of hot consomm√©; drain, place
them in hot soup tureen and pour over boiling consomm√©.


IMPERIAL RINGS

Cut stale bread in one-third inch slices. Stamp out circles three inches
in diameter; with a smaller cutter (size of top of pepper shaker) cut
out center, leaving rings about one-third inch wide. Brush with melted
butter, sprinkle lightly with salt and paprika, and brown delicately in
the oven. Serve in a circle overlapping each other on a plate covered
with a doily.


STUFFED HEARTS WITH VEGETABLES

Clean and wash three calves' hearts; stuff and skewer into shape. Draw
small strips of salt pork (lardoons) through edges of hearts. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper, dredge with flour and brown well in hot Cottolene,
with two slices onion, four slices carrot, one blade celery cut fine,
two sprays parsley, two small bits bay leaf, three cloves and one-half
teaspoon peppercorns. When hearts are richly browned, remove to Dutch
oven, casserole or deep baking dish. Add two cups Brown Stock, cover
closely and cook slowly in the oven until tender (about two hours),
basting six times while cooking.

Cut three slices of stale bread one-third inch thick, shape with large
round cutter; with a small cutter remove centers to form rings: brush
with melted butter and brown delicately in the oven. Arrange them on hot
serving platter, set a heart in each ring and surround with new carrots
and turnips cut Julienne style and cooked in boiling salted water until
tender. There should be one and one-half cups each. Drain and dress with
Ma√Ætre d'H√¥tel Butter.

STUFFING FOR HEARTS

          1/2 cup cracker crumbs.
          1/2 cup stale bread crumbs.
          2 inch cube fat salt pork finely chopped.
          2 blades celery finely chopped.
          1/2 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
          1 tablespoon onion finely chopped.
          Salt, pepper.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given and season well with salt
and pepper.


POTATO PUFF

Prepare two and one-half cups hot mashed potatoes. Add two and one-half
tablespoons butter, one-half teaspoon baking powder, season with salt
and pepper and moisten with one-half cup hot cream or milk, beat
thoroughly. Add the whites of two eggs beaten until stiff. Pile lightly
in a buttered baking dish and bake until well puffed and browned.


NEW CABBAGE SALAD

Mix two cups of new cabbage, finely shredded, with one-half cup of
celery cut in small pieces and one mild onion finely chopped. Add
one-half tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce to one cup of boiled salad
dressing and mix thoroughly with cabbage. Chill. Serve in onion cups or
in nests of crisp lettuce leaves.


RASPBERRY WHIP

          1-1/2 cups red raspberries.
          1 cup powdered sugar.
          White 1 egg.

PROCESS: Mix sugar with berries and turn into bowl in which white of egg
is slightly beaten, then mash berries and sugar and mix thoroughly with
egg. Beat with a wire whip until mixture is stiff to stand. Pile lightly
on a chilled serving dish and surround with macaroons. Serve with


GOLDEN SAUCE

          1 egg.
          1 cup powdered sugar.
          3 tablespoons Sherry wine.

PROCESS: Beat yolks until thick and light, add one half the sugar
gradually, beating constantly: beat whites until stiff, gradually adding
the remaining half cup sugar. Combine mixtures, add wine and beat
thoroughly.


WHITE NUT CAKE

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1-1/2 cups fine sugar.
          3/4 cup cold water.
          2-1/4 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          Whites 4 eggs beaten until stiff.
          1/2 teaspoon Almond extract.
          1 cup English walnut meats broken in pieces.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, beating constantly. Mix
and sift flour, baking powder and salt, add alternately to first mixture
with water, add nut meats and extract; cut and fold in whites of eggs.
Bake in a sheet thirty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Spread with

MAPLE FROSTING

          1 cup maple sugar.
          1/2 cup boiling water.
          White 1 egg.
          1/8 teaspoon cream of tartar.

PROCESS: Boil sugar, water and cream of tartar together until it spins a
thread from tip of spoon. Pour slowly in a fine stream on the beaten
white and continue beating until of the consistency to spread over cake.
(To get the exact proportion of sugar, weigh one level cup of granulated
sugar to ascertain by weight how much Maple sugar is required for this
amount of water and white of one egg. It will weigh about one-half
pound.)

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _July_

_Fifth Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF LETTUCE SOUP

          PRESSED CHICKEN      TOMATO SALAD

          LATTICE POTATOES--GREEN CORN PUDDING

          PEACH ICE CREAM--RICH CHOCOLATE CAKE

          SPICED ICED TEA

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF LETTUCE SOUP

          2 cups White Stock.
          2 heads lettuce.
          2 tablespoons rice.
          2 tablespoons butter.
          1 teaspoon finely chopped onion.
          1/2 cup hot cream.
          1 egg yolk.
          Salt and pepper.
          Few grains nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cook the onion in butter five minutes (without browning), add
rice, lettuce finely chopped, and stock, cover and cook until rice is
soft; add hot cream, slightly beaten yolk of egg and seasonings. Do not
allow soup to boil after adding egg yolk. Discard outer leaves of
lettuce, using only the hearts for soup.


PRESSED CHICKEN

Disjoint a four- or five-pound fowl, cover with boiling water and let
simmer until tender, with one carrot sliced, one onion sliced, a blade
or two of celery broken in inch pieces, two sprays parsley and one-half
teaspoon peppercorns. Add one tablespoon salt the last hour of cooking.
Drain chicken from liquor, remove the skin and bones; strain liquor,
return to range and let simmer until reduced to one cup, strain and
reserve. When the meat is nearly cold, cut it in small cubes or chop
fine; remove all fat from liquor, reheat and add chicken, stirring it
slowly, season with salt and pepper if necessary. Decorate a granite,
brick-shaped bread pan with "hard boiled" eggs cut in rings or fancy
shapes, over these pack the chicken mixture very carefully so as not to
disturb the decorations. Cover with a buttered paper, place a weight
over paper and let stand over night in a cold place. Serve with Tomato
Salad.


TOMATO SALAD

Wash garden cress and shake dry, arrange a bed on large oval platter,
discarding all coarse leaves and stems. Peel and chill five
uniform-sized tomatoes, cut a slice from the stem ends and scoop out the
pulp, invert tomato cups on a plate and set aside in a cool place. Chop
fine the solid pulp of the tomato with one chilled and pared cucumber,
add two tablespoons finely chopped chives, stir in one cup of Cream
Dressing and refill tomato cups with mixture heaping them in pyramids.
Dispose these tomato cups at intervals in cress border and place mold of
pressed chicken in center.

CREAM SALAD DRESSING

          1-1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 tablespoon mustard.
          1 tablespoon sugar.
          1 egg slightly beaten.
          2-1/2 tablespoons melted butter.
          3/4 cup cream.
          4 tablespoons vinegar.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given, adding vinegar very slowly,
beating constantly. Cook in double boiler until mixture thickens;
continue beating, strain at once and chill.


LATTICE POTATOES

Wash and pare potatoes of a uniform size. Slice on a corrugated
vegetable slicer, which is made for this purpose. Wash slices in cold
water, changing the water several times; then let stand several hours in
cold water. Drain and dry with crash towels. Fry a few at a time in deep
hot Cottolene, drain on brown paper, sprinkle with salt. Pile on a lace
paper doily in a fancy basket.


GREEN CORN PUDDING

To two cups of cooked green corn, cut from the cob (or one can of corn)
chopped fine, add two eggs slightly beaten, one teaspoon salt,
one-eighth teaspoon pepper, one teaspoon sugar, two tablespoons melted
butter, and two cups scalded milk. Mix well and turn into a buttered
pudding dish; bake until firm in moderate oven.


PEACH ICE CREAM NO. 1

          1-1/2 cups peach pulp.
          1-1/2 cups granulated sugar.
          Juice one lemon.
          1 quart thin cream.

PROCESS: Pare and stone choice, ripe peaches and rub the pulp through a
pur√©e strainer; add sugar and lemon juice, turn into the can of freezer
packed in ice and salt (using three measures of crushed ice to one of
rock salt); add cream and freeze in the usual way.


RICH CHOCOLATE CAKE

          1/2 cup Cottolene.
          1-1/2 cups sugar.
          4 eggs.
          4 squares chocolate.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/3 cup hot water.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2 cups flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon vanilla.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Melt
chocolate over hot water, add hot water specified in recipe and beat
immediately into creamed butter and sugar; add yolks of eggs beaten
until thick and light. Mix and sift flour, cinnamon, baking powder and
salt; add to first mixture alternately with milk, add vanilla. Cut and
fold in the stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Bake in a shallow pan forty
to forty-five minutes. Cover with Boiled Frosting (for recipe see Page
56).


SPICED ICED TEA

          4 teaspoons tea.
          2 cups boiling water.
          9 cloves.

PROCESS: Follow recipe for making tea. Strain into pitcher over cloves,
chill, then pour into glasses filled with cracked ice. Sweeten to taste.
The flavor of tea is preserved and is much finer by chilling the
infusion quickly, before pouring over ice. Allow three cloves for each
glass. The large Penang cloves are the best.




_August_


          _Hunger is the best seasoning for meat,
           And thirst for drink._
                                       --_Cicero._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _August_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          NOVA SCOTIA CANAP√âS

          PAN BROILED FILLETS OF BEEF--SULTANA SAUCE

          CARLSBAD POTATOES      PEAS AND ONIONS FRENCH STYLE

          LETTUCE, PEPPERGRASS AND ONION SALAD

          PEACH ICE CREAM--COCOANUT CAKE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

NOVA SCOTIA CANAP√âS

Cut white bread in one-third inch slices; stamp out with heart-shaped
cutter; spread both sides thinly with butter, brown them delicately in
the oven. Mince Nova Scotia smoked salmon and moisten with Mayonnaise or
Boiled Salad Dressing. Spread each heart with mixture, dispose a dainty
border of finely chopped white of egg around each and tip it off with a
sprinkle of the yolk pressed through a sieve. Do not cover the salmon
entirely with the egg. Arrange canap√©s on small plates covered with a
lace paper doily; garnish each with a spray of parsley and serve as
first course.


PAN BROILED FILLETS OF BEEF

Have fillets of beef cut one and one-half inches thick; shape in
circular forms. Broil ten minutes in a hissing, well-buttered frying
pan, turning every ten seconds for the first two minutes, that the
surface may be seared thoroughly, thus preventing the loss of juices.
Turn occasionally afterward. When half done season with salt, pepper,
reduce heat and finish cooking. Arrange on hot serving platter and
spread generously with soft butter. Pour over Sultana Sauce. (For recipe
see Page 61.)


CARLSBAD POTATOES

Wash and pare one dozen small, uniform-sized potatoes; soak one hour in
cold water to cover. Drain, put in stew-pan and cover with one quart of
boiling water. Add two tablespoons butter and two teaspoons salt. Cook
until soft (but not broken), then drain. Return to stew-pan. Add
one-third cup butter, one and one-half tablespoons lemon juice, and
one-eighth teaspoon paprika. Cook four or five minutes, shaking the pan
occasionally. Place in hot serving dish and sprinkle with one tablespoon
chopped parsley.


PEAS AND ONIONS--FRENCH STYLE

Cut one slice bacon in shreds crosswise, using the shears for this
purpose. Cook bacon with one-fourth cup butter about ten minutes,
without scorching bacon. Remove scraps of bacon, add two cups fresh
peas, one dozen small onions and a sprig of mint. Cook until peas and
onions are soft, adding one-fourth cup boiling water to prevent
scorching. Beat one egg yolk slightly, add one-third cup cream and one
head of lettuce cut in quarters (use lettuce hearts), season with salt
and pepper. Let boil up once and serve.


LETTUCE, PEPPERGRASS AND ONION SALAD

Separate the heart leaves of two solid heads of lettuce. Wash, drain and
chill; arrange them in a nest in salad bowl. Sprinkle between and over
leaves four tablespoons finely chopped peppergrass and small, thinly
sliced onions, separating the rings. Marinate with French Dressing;
chill and serve.


PEACH ICE CREAM No. 2

          4 cups milk.
          3 cups heavy cream.
          1 cup sugar.
          1 tablespoon lemon extract.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          2 cups fresh peach pulp.

PROCESS: Pare and pit peaches; stew until soft, rub through a sieve.
Then mix ingredients in the order given. Add peach pulp and freeze. Let
stand two hours before serving.


COCOANUT CAKE

(For recipe see Page 56.)

[Sidenote: _August_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â (COLD)

          BROILED CHICKEN--SAUCE VIENNAISE

          POTATO ROSES      CORN FRITTERS

          CAULIFLOWER √Ä LA B√âCHAMEL

          DRESSED HEAD LETTUCE

          SALAD ROLLS

          BLACKBERRY ROLY-POLY      CREAMY SAUCE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

COLD CONSOMM√â

(For recipe see Page 90.)


BROILED CHICKEN

Singe, wipe and with a sharp pointed knife (a boning knife) split the
broiler down the back the entire length, beginning at back of neck. Lay
open and remove entrails, etc., remove ribs and breast-bone, then cut
the tendons at joints. Rub bird over with soft butter, sprinkle with
salt and place on a well-greased broiler or in a well-greased wire
broiler. Cook twenty-five minutes under a gas flame or over glowing
coals, turning often. Baste bird over several times with melted butter
if it appears dry. When evenly browned, remove to well-greased dripping
pan, spread again with soft butter, cover closely, and bake until tender
at the joints. Serve with

SAUCE VIENNAISE

Reduce one small can of tomatoes by slow cooking to a thick pulp; when
strained there should be two tablespoons. To three-fourths cup
Mayonnaise Dressing add three-fourths tablespoon finely chopped capers,
one teaspoon finely chopped parsley, two teaspoons each finely chopped
gherkins and olives, one teaspoon finely chopped onion or chives. Add
tomato pulp, mix well and keep in a cool place until ready to serve.


MASHED POTATOES (FOR ROSES)

To three cups of hot riced potatoes add three tablespoons butter, one
teaspoon salt, the beaten yolks of three eggs and enough hot milk to
allow the mixture to pass readily through the pastry-bag with rose tube
attached. Shape as roses on a buttered tin sheet, brush over lightly
with egg slightly beaten and diluted with one tablespoon milk, and brown
delicately in oven.

TO SHAPE ROSES

Fill pastry bag with potato mixture. Hold the bag upright with tube
pointing downward. Guide tube with left hand and press out potato with
the right, making a circular motion. When roses are the desired size
press the tube gently into mixture and withdraw it quickly to stop the
flow and give the pyramid a pointed finish. Sweet potatoes may be
prepared in the same manner.


CORN FRITTERS

(For recipe see Page 63.)


CAULIFLOWER √Ä LA B√âCHAMEL

Select a firm, white cauliflower, remove leaves and cut off the stalk.
Soak (head down) in cold salt water to cover. Drain and cook (head up)
in boiling salted water to cover until tender but not broken apart.
Drain well and dispose on shallow serving dish. Pour over one and
one-half cups B√©chamel Sauce (see Page 85). Sprinkle with finely chopped
parsley.


DRESSED HEAD LETTUCE

Select a large, firm head of lettuce. Remove all wilted leaves. Separate
the heart leaves sufficiently to wash them thoroughly. Drain, arrange
leaves on shallow serving plate, keeping them in their original shape if
possible. Sprinkle over all finely shredded red and green prepared
peppers. (To prepare peppers, plunge them into boiling water, then
quickly rub off the glazed outer skin, drop peppers into cold water
until crisp. Cut a slice from the stem ends, remove seeds and veins,
then cut in thread like rings.) Serve with French Dressing, to which add
one tablespoon Roquefort cheese. Blend well before pouring over Salad.


BLACKBERRY ROLY-POLY

          2 cups blackberries.
          1/4 cup water.
          1 cup sugar.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          2 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          4 tablespoons Cottolene.
          Yolk 1 egg.
          White 1 egg slightly beaten.
          Granulated sugar.
          Ground cloves.

PROCESS: Cook blackberries in water and salt until berries are soft. Rub
through a sieve and add sugar to pulp; return to range and cook until
mixture thickens, stirring occasionally. Sift flour with baking powder
and salt, work in Cottolene with tips of fingers, and mix to a soft
dough with yolk of egg mixed with one-half cup of milk. Turn onto a
floured board, knead slightly and roll out in a rectangular sheet
one-fourth inch thick. Divide this into four pieces, longer than wide.
Spread each with the blackberry sauce and roll up like jelly roll; wet
the edges, press lightly to prevent unrolling. Lay on buttered sheet and
brush tops with white of egg, sprinkle with sugar and a few grains
cloves. Bake twenty-five minutes in a hot oven. Serve hot with remaining
sauce kept hot over hot water or with

CREAMY SAUCE

          1/4 cup butter.
          2/3 cup powdered sugar.
          2 tablespoons milk.
          2 tablespoons Sherry wine.
          Few grains nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cream butter, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly, add
milk and wine very slowly, continue beating. Add a sprinkle of nutmeg.
To avoid having sauce curdle, milk and wine must be added drop by drop.

[Sidenote: _August_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          CANTALOUPE √Ä LA MODE

          CONSOMM√â AU RIZ--CHEESE BALLS

          SPICED BEEF--WHIPPED CREAM HORSERADISH SAUCE

          POTATOES ITALIAN STYLE--SUCCOTASH

          PEAR SALAD

          PEACH COTTAGE PUDDING WITH CREAM

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CANTALOUPE √Ä LA MODE

Wash small ripe cantaloupe (Rockyfords) with a brush, and chill
thoroughly. Cut in halves lengthwise and fill with Pineapple or
Raspberry Ice. Arrange on a bed of cracked ice; serve one-half melon to
each guest.


RASPBERRY ICE

          4 cups water.
          1-3/4 cups sugar.
          2 cups raspberry pulp.
          1/4 cup orange juice.
          2 tablespoons lemon juice.

PROCESS: Make a syrup by boiling water and sugar twenty minutes. Mash
berries and rub through a fine sieve, add orange and lemon juice,
combine with syrup, strain and freeze. Shape with a cone mold and place
in seed cavities of halves of cantaloupe.


CONSOMM√â AU RIZ

          8 cups consomm√©.
          1/4 cup washed rice.
          6 cups cold water.
          1/2 tablespoon salt.

PROCESS: Add salt to boiling water, then add rice slowly and let cook
until rice is soft; drain. Pour over rice six cups cold water to
separate kernels. Add rice to hot consomm√© and serve with Cheese Balls.


CHEESE BALLS

          4 tablespoons butter.
          3/4 cup flour.
          1/2 cup water.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains cayenne.
          3 eggs.
          1/4 cup grated Edam Cheese.
          Cottolene.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add water, cook one minute; add
flour mixed with seasonings. Cook until mixture leaves the sides of pan,
stirring constantly. Cool slightly, add unbeaten eggs one at a time, add
cheese. Mix well and drop from tip of teaspoon into deep hot Cottolene.
Drain and serve immediately.


SPICED BEEF

Wash and wipe six pounds of beef cut from the flank. Cover with boiling
water; bring to the boiling point and skim. Reduce heat and simmer until
meat is tender (time required about five hours), adding the last hour of
cooking one-half cup each of carrot, onion and celery cut in dice, two
sprays each of parsley and thyme, one of marjoram, six cloves, one-half
teaspoon peppercorns and one tablespoon salt. Remove meat and reduce
liquor to one and one-half cups; strain. Shred the meat, mix with the
liquor and press in a granite, brick-shaped bread pan, packing solidly.
When thoroughly cold, serve, cut in thin slices, with Whipped Cream
Horseradish Sauce (for recipe see Page 120).


POTATOES A L'ITALIENNE

To two cups hot riced potatoes, add one tablespoon finely chopped
chives, one egg yolk well beaten, whites four eggs beaten until stiff,
one-half cup grated cheese. Season with salt, pepper and a few grains
cayenne. Pile lightly in a well-greased baking dish and bake from
twenty-five to thirty minutes. Turn dish around several times carefully
that mixture may puff evenly.


SUCCOTASH

Shell lima beans, wash and cover with boiling water; heat to boiling
point and drain; throw away water and rinse beans, drain again. Cook in
boiling, salted water until tender. Drain and add to an equal quantity
of hot boiled corn cut from the cob. Season with salt, pepper and
butter. Reheat before serving.


PEAR SALAD

Wipe, pare and remove the cores from the desired number of ripe (early)
pears. Cut in eighths lengthwise. Arrange on beds of crisp cress, or
lettuce heart leaves. Bestrew with prepared red peppers cut in very fine
rings. Serve with French Dressing, using lemon juice in place of
vinegar. Canned red peppers may be used when fresh peppers are not
available. To prepare peppers, plunge them into boiling water for a
moment, cut a slice from stem ends, remove seeds and veins, cover with
cold water until crisp; drain dry, and cut in fine shreds.


PEACH COTTAGE PUDDING

          1/4 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          1 egg.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/4 teaspoon almond extract.
          Fresh peaches sliced.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly; add
egg well beaten. Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt; add to
first mixture alternately with milk. Add extract and beat thoroughly.
Turn into a well-greased shallow pan, and bake twenty-five minutes in a
moderate oven. Cut in three-inch squares; pile thinly-sliced fresh
peaches on top of each portion, sprinkle thickly with powdered sugar and
serve with rich cream.

[Sidenote: _August_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          BOILED HALIBUT (COLD)--VINAIGRETTE SAUCE

          CUCUMBER BASKETS      RADISHES

          FRENCH FRIED POTATOES--BOILED SWEET CORN

          FROZEN APRICOTS--SULTANA CAKE

          DEMI TASSE

          ICED TEA

       *       *       *       *       *

BOILED HALIBUT--COLD

Have a piece of Halibut cut weighing two and one-half pounds. Tie in a
square of cheese cloth (to prevent scum from settling on the flesh of
fish). Cover with boiling water to which add salt and vinegar or lemon
juice; the acid preserves the whiteness of the fish. Boil until the
flesh leaves the bones (about thirty-five minutes). Drain and remove
from cheese cloth. Pick out bones and remove skin. Place in a vessel
that will preserve the shape of fish, chill and dispose fish on a cold
serving platter on a bed of garden cress. Set a cucumber basket at
intervals (one for each guest), and serve with

VINAIGRETTE SAUCE

          1 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon black pepper.
          Few grains cayenne.
          1 tablespoon Tarragon vinegar.
          2 tablespoons Malt vinegar.
          1/2 cup Olive oil.
          1 tablespoon chopped olives.
          1 tablespoon chopped pickle.
          1 tablespoon chopped green or red pepper.
          1 teaspoon chopped parsley.
          1-1/2 teaspoons chopped chives.

PROCESS: Put salt, pepper and cayenne in bowl, add oil slowly stirring
constantly, add remaining ingredients and blend thoroughly. Chill and
pour over Boiled Halibut.


CUCUMBER BASKETS

Select long cucumbers of uniform thickness (three cucumbers will make
six baskets), cut a slice from both the stem and blossom ends, pare and
cut in halves crosswise; cut from each piece a section so as to form a
handle crosswise of cucumber. Scoop out the soft pulp and seeds, brush
each basket over lightly with olive oil and sprinkle with finely chopped
garden cress or parsley. Fill the baskets with Mayonnaise Dressing or
Sauce Tartare (see recipe Page 84). Chill and serve in nests of
peppergrass or lettuce heart leaves.


FRENCH FRIED POTATOES

Wash and pare medium-sized potatoes, cut them lengthwise in eight pieces
of a uniform size. Soak them in cold water two hours, changing the water
several times. Drain from water and dry between towels. Then fry a few
at a time in deep hot Cottolene. Drain on brown paper and sprinkle with
salt. This is an easy method of preparing potatoes in hot weather. The
potatoes may be prepared beforehand and the process of cooking is both
simply and quickly done. Be sure the Cottolene is not too hot as the
potatoes must be cooked through, as well as browned.


BOILED SWEET CORN

Have the water boiling. Remove the husks and silk from the corn and drop
them at once into the boiling water; bring water quickly to boiling
point and let boil rapidly five to ten minutes (depending somewhat on
age of corn). Drain from water and arrange in a napkin-covered platter;
serve at once.


FROZEN APRICOTS

Drain the apricots from the liquor in the can. Reserve liquor and cut
fruit in one-fourth inch cubes. To the syrup add sufficient water to
make four cups; add one cup orange juice; add one and one-half cups
sugar. Cook five minutes, strain and pour over apricots; chill and
freeze. Fresh apricots or peaches may be used when in season. The fresh
fruit should be cooked until clear, in a syrup made of four cups of
water and two cups sugar. When this mixture is frozen to a mush, two
cups of Whipped Cream may be added, if one desires a richer dessert.


SULTANA CAKE

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          2 eggs.
          1 egg yolk.
          1 cup Sultana raisins.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2-1/4 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon mace.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly; add
well-beaten eggs and yolk. Mix and sift flour (except one tablespoon),
baking powder and salt and mace; add to first mixture alternately with
milk. Dredge raisins with tablespoon flour, add to mixture and beat
thoroughly. Turn mixture into a well-greased, brick-shaped bread pan and
bake forty minutes in a moderate oven. Frost if desired.

[Sidenote: _August_

_Fifth Sunday_]




Menu

          TOMATO CANAP√â

          COLD VEAL LOAF--WHIPPED CREAM HORSERADISH SAUCE

          CREAMED NEW POTATOES      STEAMED SUMMER SQUASH

          LETTUCE, GARDEN CRESS AND ONION SALAD

          SLICED PEACHES--CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE

          ICED COFFEE      LEMONADE

       *       *       *       *       *

TOMATO CANAP√â

Fry circles of bread, cut one-third inch thick, in deep hot Cottolene.
Saut√© slices of tomato in hot butter. Drain both on brown paper. Cover
each circle of bread with a slice of tomato, sprinkle with salt, pepper
and a few grains cayenne. Garnish each with a slice of cucumber and the
white of "hard boiled" eggs, cut in the shape of petals to represent
field daisies.


COLD VEAL LOAF

Have the bone of a knuckle of veal sawed in three pieces at the market.
Wash, wipe, and put in kettle with two pounds of lean veal, one onion
sliced, six slices carrot, one blade celery broken in pieces, one spray
parsley and one-half teaspoon peppercorns; cover with boiling water and
cook slowly until meat is tender. Drain; chop meat finely and season
well with salt, pepper and a few grains cayenne. Reduce liquor to one
cup, strain and reserve. Garnish the bottom of a granite, brick-shaped
bread pan with the white of "hard boiled" egg cut to resemble three
daisies; put a dot of the yolk in center of each and arrange sprays of
parsley between each daisy. Put a layer of meat, then a layer of thinly
sliced eggs sprinkled with parsley, finely chopped. Cover with remaining
meat; pour over strained liquor, press and let stand until cold and
jellied. Remove to serving platter, garnish with parsley and small round
radishes cut to resemble tulips. Slice thinly and serve with

WHIPPED CREAM HORSERADISH SAUCE

          4 tablespoons freshly grated horseradish.
          Few drops onion juice.
          Few grains cayenne.
          1-1/2 tablespoons vinegar.
          1/4 cup heavy cream whipped.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Mix the first five ingredients thoroughly, then fold in the
whipped cream. Chill and serve.


CREAMED NEW POTATOES

Cut two and one-half cups cold, boiled new potatoes in one-half inch
cubes. Add one and one-half cups White Sauce. Season highly with salt
and white pepper, and reheat in double boiler. Remove to hot serving
dish and sprinkle with finely chopped parsley.


STEAMED SUMMER SQUASH

Wash and cut in quarters. Cook in boiling salted water until tender.
Drain through double cheese cloth. Pass through ricer or mash with
potato masher, and season with butter, salt and a little black pepper.
Reheat and serve.


LETTUCE, GARDEN CRESS AND ONION SALAD

Separate the crisp heart leaves of two heads of lettuce; arrange them on
a shallow serving dish to represent a full-blown rose. Pick over, wash
and dry a bunch of garden cress, chop finely and sprinkle over lettuce
leaves. Chop one small onion very fine and mix with French dressing.
Pour over lettuce. Serve at once.


SLICED PEACHES

Scald fine, ripe peaches; remove skins, cut in halves and remove stones.
Slice lengthwise and arrange in serving dish in layers. Sprinkle each
layer with sugar and lemon or orange juice. Chill and serve with cream
and sugar.




_September_


          _The kitchen is a country in which there are
          always discoveries to be made_.--_La Reyni√©re._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _September_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF PEA SOUP--CRISP SARATOGA WAFERS

          BRAISED SHOULDER VEAL STUFFED--CREOLE SAUCE

          POTATO BALLS      SPINACH WITH CREAM

          LETTUCE, RADISH AND ONION SALAD

          APPLE PIE      COTTAGE CHEESE

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF PEA SOUP

          2 cups Marrowfat peas (or one can).
          2 teaspoons sugar.
          2 cups water.
          1-1/2 cups scalded milk.
          1 slice onion.
          1-1/2 tablespoons butter.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 cup hot cream.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.

PROCESS: Peas that are too hard to serve as a vegetable may be used for
soup. Cover them with the cold water and cook until soft. Rub through
sieve, reheat pulp and thicken with butter and flour cooked together.
Scald milk with onion, remove onion, add milk slowly to pea mixture,
stirring constantly. Add hot cream and seasoning. Serve with Crisp
Saratoga Wafers.


BRAISED SHOULDER OF VEAL

Have the bones removed from five pounds of the shoulder of veal (reserve
bones). Stuff with bread stuffing, truss in shape and follow directions
for Braised Beef (see Page 139). Add two sprays of thyme and marjoram.
Serve with

CREOLE SAUCE

          4 tablespoons Cottolene.
          4 tablespoons flour.
          1/4 cup green pepper cut in shreds.
          1 small clove garlic.
          1 truffle cut in thin shreds.
          1 can small button mushrooms.
          1-1/2 cups thick, well-seasoned tomato pulp.
          1-1/4 cups Brown Stock.
          Salt, pepper and cayenne.

PROCESS: Cook pepper, onion and butter together five minutes without
browning; add flour and cook two minutes, stirring constantly. Add
truffle, tomato pulp and gradually Brown Stock; continue stirring until
ingredients are well blended. Heat mushrooms in their own liquor, drain,
and add mushrooms to sauce. Stick a tooth-pick through the clove of
garlic, drop it into sauce and let it simmer fifteen minutes. Remove
garlic before serving.


POTATO BALLS

Add to five hot mashed potatoes, one-fourth teaspoon celery salt, one
teaspoon finely chopped parsley or chives, salt, pepper and three
tablespoons butter, and enough hot milk to make of the consistency to
handle. Shape into smooth, round balls, roll in flour, egg and crumbs.
Fry a golden brown in deep, hot Cottolene. Dispose around Veal.


SPINACH WITH CREAM

Discard all wilted leaves, remove the roots and pick over and wash
one-half peck of spinach in several waters, to rid it from all sand. If
young and tender, put in a stew-pan and heat gradually; let boil
twenty-five minutes, or until soft, in its own juices and the water that
clung to the leaves. Old spinach should be cooked in boiling, salted
water (it will require about two quarts of water to one peck spinach).
Drain thoroughly, chop finely in a wooden bowl. Melt three tablespoons
butter in an omelet pan; add spinach and cook four minutes, stirring
constantly, sprinkle with one and one-half tablespoons flour, continue
stirring and pour on gradually three-fourths cup hot, thin cream; simmer
five minutes.


LETTUCE, RADISH AND ONION SALAD

Remove the leaves from the stalk, discarding all wilted and unsightly
leaves. Wash and keep in cold water until crisp. Drain and dry on a
crash towel or cheese cloth. Place between leaves thin slices of round,
red radishes, sprinkle with finely sliced young green onions. Garnish
with radishes cut to resemble tulips. Serve with French Dressing.


APPLE PIE

          5 tart apples.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          1/4 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1/8 teaspoon salt.
          1-1/4 tablespoons butter.
          1 tablespoon lemon juice.
          Grated rind 1/4 lemon.

PROCESS: Line a pie pan with Plain Paste. Wipe, pare, core and cut
apples in quarters, then in slices lengthwise. Pile them in lined pie
pan, heaping them well in center, leaving a half-inch space around edge
of pie. Mix sugar, nutmeg, salt, lemon juice, grated rind and turn over
apples. Dot over with bits of butter; wet edges and cover with top
crust; press and flute edges. Bake forty-five minutes in a moderate
oven.


PLAIN PASTE

          1-1/2 cups flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon baking powder.
          1/4 cup Cottolene.
          Ice Water.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and baking powder. Rub in Cottolene
(reserving one and one-half tablespoons), with tips of fingers. Add just
enough ice water to form a soft dough, mixing it in with a knife. Turn
on a floured board and roll out in a thin sheet, spread lightly with
remaining Cottolene. Roll like jelly roll and cut in two pieces, having
one piece a trifle larger than the other. Chill. Then stand rolls on
end, press down with the hand and roll in circular piece to fit pie pan.
The larger piece is for the top crust. This recipe makes the exact
quantity of pastry for one medium-sized pie with two crusts. If desired,
omit baking powder.


COTTAGE CHEESE

Put two quarts thick sour milk in a milk pan, place it on the back of
range where it will not boil or simmer; allow it to remain there until
the curd has separated from the whey. Lay a double square of cheese
cloth over a bowl, turn in the milk, lift the edges and corners of
cloth, draw them together, tie with a piece of twine and hang it up to
drain. When quite dry, turn into a bowl; season with salt and mix with a
silver fork, add sweet cream until of the desired consistency. Serve
very cold with hot gingerbread.

[Sidenote: _September_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          SUMMER SAUSAGE WITH

          RIPE OLIVES AND DILL PICKLES

          ROAST FILLET BEEF--MUSHROOM SAUCE

          PARSLEY POTATOES      BROILED TOMATOES

          BANANA FRITTERS

          PEPPER AND ONION SALAD

          MOCK MINCE PIE      CHEESE

          ICED TEA

          BUTTERMILK

       *       *       *       *       *

SUMMER SAUSAGE (APPETIZER)

Cut summer sausage in very thin slices. Dispose them on a narrow platter
overlapping one another. Garnish with sprays of peppergrass or parsley.
Arrange thinly sliced dill pickles on either side of sausage, placing a
ripe olive here and there; radishes cut to resemble roses may also be
used. Serve as an appetizer.


ROAST FILLET OF BEEF

Trim a small fillet of beef weighing about four pounds into shape. Lard
the upper side and sprinkle with salt, pepper and dredge with flour.
Sprinkle small cubes of fat salt pork thickly over the bottom of a
dripping pan, set a wire trivet or rack on pork and lay meat on trivet.
Place in a very hot oven at first, to sear over surface. Baste every
five minutes for the first fifteen minutes, then several times after
during the cooking. If liked rare, it should cook thirty minutes; if
medium, allow thirty-five to forty minutes. Serve with Brown Mushroom
Sauce (see Page 167) using fat in dripping pan.


PARSLEY POTATOES

Wash, pare and cut potatoes in one-half inch cubes; there should be
three cups. Blanch by parboiling five minutes in boiling salted water;
drain. Melt one-third cup of butter in a frying-pan, add potatoes, and
cook over a slow fire until potatoes are soft and delicately browned.
Melt two tablespoons Cottolene in a sauce-pan, add a few drops onion
juice, one and one-half tablespoons flour, one-half teaspoon salt,
one-eighth teaspoon pepper; stir to a smooth paste and pour on slowly
one cup hot milk, stirring constantly. Remove from range and add one egg
yolk slightly beaten. Pour sauce over potatoes and sprinkle with finely
chopped parsley.


BROILED TOMATOES

Select four firm, smooth, ripe tomatoes. Wipe them and cut out the hard
center around the stem ends; then cut them in halves crosswise. Rub the
cut sides lightly with a clove of garlic and dip cut side in soft
butter. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and buttered crumbs, pressing the
crumbs into tomato with a broad knife. Arrange them in a well-greased
wire broiler and broil with skin side down over glowing coals or under a
gas flame until soft, using care that they do not scorch. Remove to hot
serving platter, drop a bit of butter on each and serve immediately.
Onion juice may be used in place of garlic.


BANANA FRITTERS

          3 bananas.
          1 cup bread flour.
          2 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 tablespoon sugar.
          1/4 cup cream or milk.
          1 egg beaten very lightly.
          1/2 tablespoon lemon juice.
          1/2 tablespoon Sherry wine.

PROCESS: Sift dry ingredients together twice. To beaten egg add cream
and combine mixtures. Force bananas through a sieve and mix pulp with
lemon juice and sherry wine; add to batter, beat thoroughly, and drop by
tablespoonfuls into deep, hot Cottolene. Drain, sprinkle with powdered
sugar and serve with

ORANGE SAUCE

Make, a syrup by boiling one cup sugar with one-fourth cup water and two
shavings of orange rind, four minutes. Remove from range, lift out
orange peel, add one-half tablespoon butter and one tablespoon each of
orange and lemon juice and Sherry wine.


PEPPER AND ONION SALAD

Plunge a bright-red bell pepper (Ruby King) into boiling water, remove
immediately and rub off the outer "shiny" skin. Cover with ice water to
chill and become crisp. Cut a slice from the stem end and remove the
seeds and veins, then cut in rings as thin as possible. Cut one small
Spanish onion in very thin slices, separate the rings and "crisp" in ice
water. Drain and toss together both onion and pepper rings. Season with
salt, pepper, and pour over two tablespoons oil and one tablespoon
vinegar. Crush the pepper and onion into the dressing, then pile it in
nests of crisp lettuce heart leaves.


MOCK MINCE PIE

          2 Uneeda biscuits, rolled fine.
          1-1/2 cups sugar.
          1 cup molasses.
          1/4 cup lemon juice.
          2 tablespoons brandy.
          1 cup raisins seeded and shredded.
          1/2 cup butter.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          Cinnamon, Cloves, and Nutmeg.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given. Add spices to taste. Line a
pie pan with Plain Paste, turn in mixture, wet edges and cover with top
crust made of Rich Paste; press and flute edges. Bake thirty-five
minutes in a moderate oven.


RICH PASTE

          1-1/2 cups flour.
          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          3/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon baking powder.
          Ice water.

PROCESS: Mix salt with flour, cut in Cottolene (except one tablespoon)
with a knife, moisten with cold water. Turn on a floured board, pat and
roll out, spread with tablespoon of Cottolene and dredge lightly with
flour, then roll sheet like a jelly roll; divide in two equal parts.
Roll out a trifle larger than pie tin.

[Sidenote: _September_

_Third Sunday_]



Menu

          VEAL, SPANISH STYLE, (IN CASSEROLE)

          STUFFED POTATOES--TURNIPS IN CREAM SAUCE

          STEWED CORN AND TOMATOES

          DRESSED ENDIVE

          PEACH DUMPLINGS--SHERRY SAUCE

          COFFEE

          CIDER

       *       *       *       *       *

VEAL, SPANISH STYLE, (IN CASSEROLE)

          2 pounds veal, cut from leg.
          1/3 cup fat salt pork or bacon.
          3/4 cup fine, soft bread crumbs.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon black pepper.
          Few grains cayenne.
          1 teaspoon chopped parsley.
          2 cups cooked and strained tomato pulp.
          1/2 green pepper finely chopped.
          1/2 onion finely chopped.
          1 egg slightly beaten.
          Soda.
          Worcestershire Sauce.

PROCESS: Remove all fat tissue and skin from veal; remove skin from
pork. Pass both through meat grinder twice, add crumbs and seasonings,
except tomato, onion and green pepper; mix thoroughly and bind together
with egg. Shape in balls the size of a small egg. Roll in flour and
saut√© a rich brown in Cottolene made hot in an iron frying pan. Heat
tomato pulp, add one-eighth teaspoon soda, one-half teaspoon salt and
one-half tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce. Turn into a warm casserole,
add chopped pepper and onion. Dispose balls over sauce, rinse frying pan
with a little boiling water or Brown Stock and pour over balls. Cover
and let simmer in a moderate oven two hours. Serve from casserole, or
arrange on a hot platter and surround with a border of boiled rice
sprinkled with finely chopped parsley; place a spray of parsley in each
meat ball.


STUFFED POTATOES

Wash six medium-sized, smooth potatoes. Bake, and cut off a lengthwise
slice from each; scoop out potato with a spoon using care that the
shells are not broken. Pass through ricer, add two tablespoons butter,
season with salt and pepper, one-half cup hot milk or cream. Add two egg
yolks well beaten, then fold in the stiffly beaten whites. Refill shells
with this mixture, using pastry bag and rose tube or pile it lightly
with spoon (do not spread smoothly). Bake in a hot oven until potatoes
are well puffed and browned.


TURNIPS IN CREAM SAUCE

Wash, pare and cut purple-top turnips in one-fourth inch cubes. Cook in
boiling salted water until tender (from forty minutes to one hour).
Drain well and reheat in White Sauce using cream in place of milk in
sauce. (For Cream Sauce see Page 151.)


STEWED CORN AND TOMATOES

Cut the corn from six ears of tender, sweet, green corn; scrape the cobs
with back of knife. Cook until tender in as little water as possible,
then add an equal quantity of stewed tomatoes. Add one-third cup butter
and one tablespoon sugar. Season with salt and pepper, heat to boiling
point and turn into hot serving dish.


DRESSED ENDIVE

Marinate the bleached leaves of crisp endive with French Dressing,
adding one and one-half tablespoons finely chopped chives and one-half
tablespoon Nasturtium seed cells finely chopped, to the dressing just
before pouring over Endive.


PEACH DUMPLINGS

          2 cups flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1-1/2 cups granulated sugar.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          7/8 cup cream.
          Peaches.
          2-1/2 cups cold water.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt; rub in Cottolene
with tips of fingers, add cream gradually, cutting it in with a knife.
Turn on a floured board, knead slightly, pat and roll out to one-half
inch thickness. Shape with a large biscuit cutter. Pare juicy, ripe
peaches, cut in halves lengthwise, remove stones, cut in quarters and
place three-quarters of a peach on each circle of dough, enclose them,
pressing the edges together. Place in a buttered, granite dripping pan
one and one-half inches apart, sift sugar around dumplings and pour cold
water over sugar. Bake in a hot oven twenty minutes, basting three
times. Serve with Hard or

SHERRY SAUCE

          3 tablespoons butter.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          2 egg yolks well beaten.
          3/4 cup cream.
          3 tablespoons sherry wine.
          Few grains salt.
          1/8 teaspoon nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cream butter, add sugar, egg yolks, salt and gradually the
cream, stirring constantly. Cook over hot water until mixture coats the
spoon; add sherry and beat again. Turn in a sauce boat and sprinkle with
nutmeg.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _September_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          TOMATO SOUP

          FRIED CHICKEN--CREAM GRAVY

          BAKED POTATOES      CORN FRITTERS

          CAULIFLOWER SALAD

          PEACH CAKE WITH CREAM

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

TOMATO SOUP

(For recipe see Page 40.)


FRIED CHICKEN

Dress, clean and disjoint two chickens. Rub chicken over with a half
lemon cut in half lengthwise, sprinkle with salt, pepper and dredge with
flour. Saut√© in hot Cottolene until richly browned, turning often.
Reduce heat, cover and let cook slowly until tender. It may be necessary
to add a little moisture (about 1/4 cup of hot stock or water). Remove
to serving platter and surround with Corn Fritters. Pass Cream Gravy.

CREAM GRAVY

          1/4 cup butter.
          1 slice onion.
          1/4 cup flour.
          1-1/2 cups well-seasoned chicken stock.
          1/2 cup hot cream.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.

PROCESS: Cook butter in a sauce-pan with onion until onion is delicately
browned. Remove onion, add flour mixed with seasonings; stir to a smooth
paste and brown lightly. Add hot stock gradually, stirring constantly.
Add hot cream and beat until smooth and glossy. The color of this sauce
is that of Caf√© au Lait.


CORN FRITTERS

          2 cups grated corn.
          1/4 cup milk.
          1-1/3 cup flour.
          2 teaspoons sugar.
          1/3 cup melted butter.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          3 eggs well beaten.

PROCESS: Mix corn, milk, flour, sugar and salt, add eggs. Drop by
tablespoonfuls on a hot well-greased griddle and cook as griddle cakes
until browned on one side; then turn and brown the other side.


CAULIFLOWER SALAD

Marinate a prepared cauliflower (see recipe on Page 95) with French
Dressing, to which add one tablespoon finely chopped chives. Dispose in
a nest of peppergrass, water cress, endive or lettuce heart leaves.
Sprinkle with grated Edam cheese.


PEACH CAKE WITH SWEETENED CREAM

          2 cups flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          3/4 cup rich milk.
          5 peaches.
          Sultana raisins.
          Mace and sugar.

PROCESS: Mix and sift the first three ingredients. Rub in Cottolene with
tips of fingers, add milk, mixing it in with a knife. This dough must be
soft enough to spread in a shallow, well-buttered pan to the depth of
one inch. (Add more milk if necessary.) Pare ripe, juicy peaches; cut in
halves lengthwise, remove stones and press halves into dough (cut side
up) in parallel rows, leaving a little space between rows. Brush peaches
over with melted butter, sprinkle with raisins, granulated sugar and
lightly with mace. Serve hot with Hard Sauce, or with cream sweetened
and flavored with nutmeg.




_October_


          _Oh! You who have been a-fishing
             will endorse me when I say,
           That it always is the biggest fish
             you catch that gets away._
                                --_Eugene Field._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _October_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          SHRIMP COCKTAILS

          POTATO SOUP--CROUTONS

          BOILED COD--EGG SAUCE

          BOILED POTATOES--SCALLOPED TOMATOES

          PICKLED BEETS

          STEAMED PEACH PUDDING--VANILLA SAUCE

          AFTER-DINNER COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

SHRIMP COCKTAILS

Allow one-fourth cup shrimps broken in pieces for each Cocktail. Season
with two tablespoons each tomato catsup, Sherry wine, one tablespoon
lemon juice, a few drops Tobasco Sauce, one-fourth teaspoon finely
chopped chives and salt to taste. Serve thoroughly chilled in Cocktail
glasses.


POTATO SOUP

          4 cups potatoes.
          1 large purple-top turnip.
          3 cups boiling water.
          3-1/2 cups scalded milk.
          1 onion sliced.
          1/4 cup butter.
          1/3 cup flour.
          2 teaspoons salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1/2 cup hot cream.
          Parsley.

PROCESS: Wash, pare and cut potatoes in one-fourth inch slices. Wash,
pare and cut turnip the same. Cover with boiling water and cook ten
minutes; drain, add onion and three cups boiling water. Cook until
vegetables are tender; drain and reserve water. Rub vegetables through
strainer, add water, add milk. Reheat and bind with butter and flour
cooked together. Add hot cream and seasonings. Turn into hot tureen and
sprinkle with finely chopped parsley.


BOILED FRESH COD

Wash and wipe a four-pound cut of fresh cod. Tie it loosely in a piece
of cheese cloth just large enough to cover fish. Place on a trivet in a
kettle, cover with boiling water, and add three slices onion, three
slices carrot, one spray parsley, a bit of bay leaf, three cloves, a
tablespoon salt and one-half cup vinegar. Bring quickly to the boiling
point, then reduce heat and simmer gently from twenty to thirty minutes.
Hard boiling breaks up the flakes of fish and toughens the fibre. Drain
from liquor, place fish on serving platter, remove the skin and pour a
few spoonfuls of Egg Sauce over the fish and the remainder around it.
Sprinkle finely chopped parsley over all, and garnish with hard-cooked
eggs cut to resemble pond lilies.

EGG SAUCE

          4 tablespoons butter.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1 cup boiling water.
          1/2 cup hot cream.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          4 hard-cooked eggs.
          Parsley finely chopped.

PROCESS: Melt one-half the butter in a sauce-pan, add flour mixed with
seasonings, pour on slowly hot water, stirring constantly. Boil five
minutes, then add remaining butter in small bits. Continue stirring. Add
hot cream and two eggs chopped moderately. Garnish with remaining eggs.
Pour sauce around fish and sprinkle with parsley.


BOILED POTATOES

Wash, scrub and pare one dozen medium-sized potatoes. If old, let them
stand in cold water for several hours before paring, to freshen them.
Cover with cold water, heat to boiling point, cover and boil fifteen
minutes, then add salt, replace cover and cook until potatoes are soft
(about fifteen minutes longer). Drain perfectly dry and shake the
potatoes in a current of cold air. Place sauce-pan in a warm place,
cover with a crash towel until ready to serve. Serve as soon as
possible, if you would have a mealy potato.


SCALLOPED TOMATOES

Season one quart of canned tomatoes with one and a fourth teaspoons
salt, one-eighth teaspoon pepper, two tablespoons sugar, one-half
tablespoon grated onion and a few grains cayenne. Moisten one and
one-half cups of soft bread crumbs with one-half cup melted butter.
Butter a deep baking dish, sprinkle with a thick layer of crumbs. Pour
in tomato mixture and cover with remaining crumbs. Bake in the oven
until cooked throughout and crumbs are browned.


PICKLED BEETS

Prepare beets as for Buttered Beets (see Page 143). Cut them in slices
and lay them in a stone or glass jar. Allow one slice of onion for each
beet, one tablespoon grated horseradish, eight cloves and vinegar enough
to cover. Let stand twenty-four hours and they will be ready for use.
Beets thus prepared will not keep longer than a week. If vinegar is too
strong, dilute with one-fourth part cold water.


STEAMED PEACH PUDDING

Fill a two-quart mold two-thirds full of pared, stoned and sliced
peaches. Butter the inside edge of mold, also the inside of cover. Cover
with a soft dough made by mixing and sifting two cups flour, one-half
teaspoon salt and four teaspoons baking powder. Rub one tablespoon
Cottolene into flour mixture with tips of fingers, add sufficient rich
milk to make a soft dough. Sprinkle peaches with one-half cup sugar,
one-fourth teaspoon salt and dot over with one tablespoon butter cut in
small bits. Spread soft dough over all, cover closely and steam one
hour. Serve at once with

VANILLA SAUCE

          1 tablespoon corn-starch.
          1 cup sugar.
          1/8 teaspoon salt.
          2 cups boiling water.
          1-1/2 teaspoons vanilla.
          2 tablespoons butter.

PROCESS: Mix corn-starch, sugar and salt, add water slowly, stirring
constantly. Boil gently eight minutes, remove from range, add vanilla,
and butter in small bits; stir until well blended.

[Sidenote: _October_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          VEGETABLE SOUP

          FRIED CHICKEN--B√âCHAMEL SAUCE

          BROWNED SWEET POTATOES      STUFFED TOMATOES

          KOLE SLAW

          BAKED APPLES STUFFED WITH FIGS

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

VEGETABLE SOUP

          1/2 cup carrot.
          1/2 cup turnip.
          1/2 cup celery.
          2 cups potato.
          1/3 cup onion.
          1-1/2 quarts beef broth.
          1/3 cup butter.
          1/2 tablespoon finely chopped parsley.
          1-1/2 teaspoons salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.

PROCESS: Wash and scrape carrot, cut in tiny cubes; wash and pare
turnip, cut same as carrot; wash, scrape and cut celery in thin slices;
wash, pare and cut potatoes in one-fourth inch cubes; peel and cut onion
in thin slices, mix vegetables, except potatoes, and cook ten minutes in
butter, stirring constantly. Add potatoes, cover and cook three or four
minutes, add beef broth which was previously strained and all fat
removed. Cover and simmer one hour. Put parsley, salt and pepper in
bottom of soup tureen and turn in hot soup.


FRIED CHICKEN

Separate two young chickens in pieces for serving; dip in milk, sprinkle
with salt, pepper and dredge with flour, or dip in crumbs, egg and
crumbs and fry in deep hot Cottolene. Cottolene should not be too hot
the latter half of cooking chicken. Drain on brown paper; serve on hot
buttered toast with B√©chamel Sauce. Double the recipe for B√©chamel Sauce
(see Page 85.)


BROWNED SWEET POTATOES

Boil sweet potatoes, remove skins and cut lengthwise in one-half inch
slices. Cool. Dip each slice in melted butter, sprinkle with salt,
pepper and thickly with brown sugar. Lay in a well-greased dripping pan
and brown in a hot oven. Dispose around rim of platter containing Fried
Chicken.


STUFFED TOMATOES

Select six firm, smooth tomatoes. Cut a thin slice from the blossom end.
Carefully scoop out the pulp and mix it with an equal quantity of cooked
corn, rice or bread crumbs. Season with salt, pepper, a few grains
cayenne, three tablespoons melted butter and a few drops of onion juice.
Refill tomato cups, replace the tops, place them in a buttered baking
dish and bake thirty minutes.


KOLE SLAW

Shred half a head of cabbage very fine. Soak in cold, acidulated water
to cover (add one tablespoon vinegar to one quart water). Drain and mix
thoroughly with Cream Dressing. (See Page 50.) Chill and serve in lemon
cups arranged in nests of cress or parsley.


BAKED APPLES STUFFED WITH FIGS

Select fine-flavored, tart apples, wipe, core and pare. Fill cavities
with washed figs cut in pieces. Bake until tender in a hot oven, basting
with hot sugar syrup. Serve cold with thick cream sweetened, and
flavored with nutmeg.

SUGAR SYRUP

Cook one cup sugar and one and one-half cups water ten minutes. Add two
thin shavings of orange rind to syrup while cooking.

[Sidenote: _October_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          TOMATO SOUP--TOASTED WAFERS

          PICKLES      CELERY

          BRAISED BEEF--BROWN GRAVY

          BAKED POTATOES--FRIED EGG PLANT

          SCALLOPED CABBAGE

          ROMAINE--FRENCH DRESSING

          CHEESE FINGERS

          PEACH DUFF--FOAMY SAUCE

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

TOMATO SOUP

(For recipe see Page 40).


BRAISED BEEF

Select five pounds of beef from the round or rump. Sprinkle with salt,
pepper and dredge with flour. Brown richly in a hot frying-pan in some
of its own fat; or with fat salt pork tried out, turning often. Place
meat in a Dutch oven or an earthen casserole on three thin slices of
salt pork, surround with two-thirds cup each of fat salt pork cut in
small cubes, carrot, onion and celery, a spray each of parsley, thyme
and marjoram. Add two cups Brown Stock or water, the half of a small bay
leaf, two small red pepper-pods, or one-half teaspoon pepper-corns, four
cloves. Sprinkle all with salt and strew top of meat with cubes of salt
pork. Cover closely and cook in a slow oven from four to five hours,
basting occasionally. Remove meat and strain the liquor. Rinse the
vessel in which meat was browned with stock or water, reserve the
liquor. Prepare a Brown Sauce with this liquor following recipe for
Plain Brown Sauce (see Page 82).

Serve in a sauce-boat, or turn around meat after placing on hot serving
platter. A cup of hot, stewed and strained tomatoes may be added to the
sauce, also one and one-half tablespoons of freshly grated horseradish
root and one tablespoon of Worcestershire Sauce; all of which improves
the flavor.


BAKED POTATOES

Wash and scrub with a vegetable brush eight uniform-sized potatoes.
Place in dripping pan, and bake in hot oven forty-five minutes, turning
when half done. Take up each potato with a towel and press gently to
crack the skins. Put a half teaspoon butter in each potato and serve at
once.


FRIED EGG PLANT

Pare a medium-sized egg plant, cut in one-fourth inch slices and soak in
cold salt water over night. Drain and cover with cold water one hour,
drain again and dry between towels. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, dip
in batter and fry in deep, hot Cottolene.

FRITTER BATTER

          1 cup bread flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          Few grains white pepper.
          2/3 cup milk.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          2 teaspoons olive oil.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and pepper; add milk slowly, stirring
until batter is smooth; add olive oil and well beaten eggs.


SCALLOPED CABBAGE

Cut one-half large head or one small head boiled cabbage, in pieces.
Cover with one cup White Sauce, sprinkle with one-third cup grated
cheese, two tablespoons finely chopped pimentos; season with salt,
pepper, mix well. Turn into a well-greased baking dish and cover with
buttered crumbs; place on grate in oven and bake until heated throughout
and crumbs are browned.


ROMAINE WITH FRENCH DRESSING

Remove the wilted leaves from two heads of romaine, trim off the stalk
and cut the heads in halves lengthwise (if heads are large, they may be
cut in quarters); lay in cold water, cut side down, until crisp. Drain
well, dispose on salad plates and pour over French Dressing. Serve two
Cheese Fingers with each portion of Salad.


CHEESE FINGERS

Mix one Cream Cheese with an equal quantity of finely chopped English
walnut meats; season with salt, black pepper and a few grains cayenne.
Moisten with Cream Salad Dressing. Spread between thin slices of white
bread and cut in strips the width of fingers.


PEACH DUFF

          1 quart thinly sliced peaches.
          2 cups sugar.
          1 tablespoon Cottolene.
          3/4 cup milk.
          2 cups flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt; rub in Cottolene
with tips of fingers, add milk gradually, mixing ingredients with a
knife. Turn on a slightly floured board, knead slightly, pat and roll to
fit top of pudding dish. Butter bottom and sides of dish, put in peaches
and sugar in layers. Cover with dough; press edges over edge of dish and
steam one hour. Serve in dish in which it was steamed. Serve with

FOAMY SAUCE

          1/2 cup butter.
          1 cup powdered sugar.
          Yolk 1 egg.
          2 tablespoons sherry wine.
          Whites 2 eggs.
          Nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cream butter; add sugar gradually, stirring constantly, yolk of
egg and sherry; continue stirring. Cook over hot water until mixture
thinly coats wooden spoon. Remove from range and pour over stiffly
beaten whites of eggs. Turn in serving pitcher and sprinkle with
nutmeg.

[Sidenote: _October_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          WALNUT AND OLIVE CANAP√â

          CLAM AND TOMATO CONSOMM√â

          BROWNED CRACKERS

          SWEET GHERKINS      PICCALILLI

          VEAL POT PIE WITH BAKED DUMPLINGS

          BUTTERED BEETS      BAKED SQUASH

          STUFFED TOMATO SALAD

          MOCK CHERRY PIE      CHEESE

          COFFEE      CIDER

       *       *       *       *       *

NUT AND OLIVE CANAP√â

Cut stale white bread in crescents. Fry a delicate brown in deep hot
Cottolene. Drain on brown paper. Mix equal parts of finely chopped
olives and English walnuts, season with a few grains cayenne and moisten
with Mayonnaise or Boiled Salad Dressing to the consistency to spread.
Spread fried bread with mixture and garnish with very thin strips of
pimentos; set pimolas in center of each canap√©.


CLAM AND TOMATO CONSOMM√â

To four cups of Consomm√© add two cups each clam water and tomato pulp.
Clear, and add soft part of clams. Heat to boiling point and serve in
Bouillon cups.

TO PREPARE CLAMS

Wash and scrub (in several waters) with a stiff vegetable brush two
quarts of clams. Place in an agate stew pan, add one-half cup cold
water, cover and let simmer until shells open. Remove clams from shells
and strain liquor through a napkin. Use only the soft parts of clams.


BROWNED CRACKERS

Spread one dozen Saltines with butter; sprinkle with a few grains
cayenne. Brown delicately in a hot oven; serve at once.


PICCALILLI

          3 quarts green tomatoes.
          2 heads celery.
          4 mild red peppers.
          2 mild green peppers.
          2 large white onions.
          2 large ripe cucumbers.
          1 cup salt.
          1-1/2 quarts cider vinegar.
          2 pounds brown sugar.
          1/4 cup white mustard seed.
          1 teaspoon mustard.
          1-1/2 teaspoons black pepper.

PROCESS: Chop the vegetables, sprinkle with salt and let stand over
night. In the morning drain and press in a coarse crash towel to remove
all the acrid juice possible. Add vinegar, sugar and spices and simmer
until vegetables are tender and clear. Sterilize fruit jars and fill to
overflowing. Seal and store.


VEAL POT PIE WITH BAKED DUMPLINGS

Cut two pounds of veal from the leg in one-inch cubes. Add a fourth-inch
thick slice of salt pork, cut in very small cubes. Cover with boiling
water. Add one small carrot sliced, one stalk celery broken in pieces,
and two slices onion. When half done add one-half tablespoon salt. Cook
until meat is tender. Remove the meat and strain the broth; thicken
broth with flour diluted with cold water. Put meat into a baking dish
and pour over enough of the thickened broth to barely cover the meat.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper. Make a soft dough by mixing and sifting
one and one-half cups pastry flour, one-half teaspoon salt, two and
one-half teaspoons baking powder; rub in three tablespoons Cottolene
with tips of fingers, then add milk enough to make a soft dough and drop
by tablespoonfuls upon meat--(dumplings should set upon the meat and not
sink into gravy) close together to cover the surface. Bake thirty
minutes in a hot oven. Serve remaining gravy in a sauce-boat.


BUTTERED BEETS

Wash and scrub beets with a vegetable brush, being careful not to break
the skin. Cook in boiling water to cover (about an hour for small young
beets, and old beets until tender). Drain and rub off the skins at once;
slice, sprinkle with salt and pepper and dot over with bits of butter.
Serve hot.


BAKED SQUASH

Cut Hubbard squash in pieces for serving. Remove seeds and stringy
portion. Put one-half teaspoon molasses in each portion and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Bake in a hot oven until tender. Put a piece of
butter on each portion and serve in the shell.


STUFFED TOMATO SALAD

Select six smooth, ripe tomatoes. Scald quickly and remove skins. Cut a
slice from stem ends, scoop out pulp and chill tomato cups. Drain the
pulp and add an equal quantity of crisp celery cut in small pieces,
cucumber cut in small dice, and shrimp broken in four pieces. Moisten
with Mayonnaise Dressing. Refill tomato cups, put a rose of Mayonnaise
on top of each, using pastry bag and rose tube. Serve in lettuce heart
leaves.


MOCK CHERRY PIE

Mix one and one-half cups cranberries chopped moderately, three-fourths
cup seeded and shredded raisins, one cup sugar, one tablespoon flour and
a sprinkle of salt. Pile this mixture in a pie pan lined with Plain
Paste. Dot over with one tablespoon butter. Add two tablespoons orange
juice. Cover with Rich Paste and bake as other pies.




_November_


          _An odor rich comes stealing,
           From out the oven bright,
           That sets my pulse a-reeling,
           And gives my heart delight._
                                --_R. R._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _November_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTERS ON THE HALF SHELL

          CONSOMM√â DUCHESS--IMPERIAL STICKS

          CUCUMBER PICKLES      CELERY

          ROLLED RIB ROAST OF BEEF--BROWN GRAVY

          FRANCONIA POTATOES      BAKED TOMATOES

          SPICED CRAB APPLES

          ESCAROLLE SALAD

          GRAHAM PLUM PUDDING WITH BROWN SUGAR SAUCE

          CHEESE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSOMM√â DUCHESS

(For recipe see Page 15.)


ROLLED RIB ROAST OF BEEF

Have the ribs removed, meat rolled and skewered in shape, from a
five-pound rib roast of beef, at the market, (have ribs and trimmings
sent with roast). Wipe meat, sprinkle with salt, pepper, dredge with
flour and arrange on rack in dripping pan. Place in a hot oven and, when
slightly brown, reduce heat and baste every ten minutes for the first
half hour with fat in pan, afterwards every fifteen minutes during
cooking. (If cooked rare it will require one hour and fifteen minutes.)

BROWN GRAVY

Drain and strain fat in the pan--return three tablespoons to dripping
pan, add four and one-half tablespoons flour and brown richly (do not
burn flour), add slowly one and one-half cups of Brown Stock or boiling
water, stirring constantly. Season with salt, pepper, and one-half
teaspoon Kitchen Bouquet.


FRANCONIA POTATOES

Wash and pare six medium-sized potatoes; parboil five minutes. Drain
dry. Place on grate around roast beef. Baste with fat in pan when
basting roast. Bake from thirty to thirty-five minutes, turning often or
when basting roast. Sprinkle with salt and serve surrounding rolled
roast, alternating with Stuffed Tomatoes.


BAKED TOMATOES

Select six smooth, firm, ripe tomatoes. Wash, wipe and cut a slice from
the stem end; scoop out the seeds and soft pulp. Mix with the pulp an
equal amount of corn cut from the cob, one tablespoon finely chopped
green pepper, half tablespoon finely chopped onion. Season with salt and
pepper, add one and one-half tablespoons melted butter and a teaspoon
salt. Mix well and refill tomato cups; sprinkle tops with buttered
crumbs. Place tomatoes in a granite dripping pan and bake until tomatoes
are soft and crumbs are brown. Remove to serving dish with a broad knife
and serve.


SPICED CRAB APPLES

Pick over, wash and drain firm crab apples, do not remove the stems.
(Apples must not be too ripe). For eight pounds of fruit allow four
pounds of sugar, one quart vinegar, one-fourth cup whole cloves,
one-fourth cup stick cinnamon broken in pieces. Boil sugar, vinegar and
spices ten minutes. Strain and tie spices loosely in a piece of cheese
cloth. Put fruit in strained liquor, also bag of spices, and cook slowly
until fruit can be easily pierced with a small wooden skewer
(tooth-pick). Remove fruit and fill a sterilized stone jar. Simmer
liquor slowly until reduced to half the original quantity; pour over
fruit. Lay bag of spices on top; seal and store.


ESCAROLLE SALAD

Marinate the bleached leaves of two heads of escarolle with French
Dressing. Chill one hour before serving that it may be crisp. Sprinkle
thickly with finely chopped chives and a sweet, red, bell pepper chopped
very fine or cut in fine thread-like rings.


GRAHAM PLUM PUDDING

          1-1/2 cups Graham flour.
          1 cup N. O. molasses.
          1/2 cup milk.
          1 cup seeded raisins.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/4 teaspoon cloves.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          1/2 teaspoon soda.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.

PROCESS: Sift flour, spices, salt and soda; add raisins, molasses, milk
and eggs, beat thoroughly, then add melted Cottolene. Turn into
well-greased brown bread molds and steam four hours. Serve with

BROWN SUGAR SAUCE

          5 tablespoons butter.
          1 cup soft brown sugar.
          1/2 tablespoon vanilla.
          1/3 cup thick cream.

PROCESS: Roll sugar, sift and add gradually to cream, stirring
constantly. Cream butter and add first mixture slowly, continue
stirring. Add vanilla and beat thoroughly with a whip.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _November_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â--BREAD STICKS

          CELERY HEARTS      MUSTARD PICKLES

          ROAST VENISON      WINE SAUCE

          MASHED SWEET POTATOES      CREAMED CELERY

          SPICED PEACHES

          PEPPER AND GRAPE FRUIT SALAD

          MAYONNAISE DRESSING

          NUT BREAD SANDWICHES

          FROZEN RICE PUDDING

          COMPOTE PINEAPPLE

          STUFFED DATES      SALTED NUTS

          CAF√â NOIR

CONSOMM√â

          4 lbs. thickest part of hind beef shin.
          1 lb. marrow-bone.
          3 lbs. knuckle of veal.
          4 cups chicken stock.
          Carrot }
          Celery } 1/2 cup each, cut in cubes.
          Turnip }
          1 medium-sized onion sliced.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          1 tablespoon salt.
          1 teaspoon peppercorns.
          1/2 dozen cloves.
          1 small bay leaf.
          2 sprays parsley.
          3 sprays thyme.
          2 sprays marjoram.
          4 quarts cold water.

PROCESS: Wipe the meat and bone with a piece of cheese-cloth wrung from
cold water. Remove the meat from beef shin and cut it in one-inch cubes.
Remove the marrow from bone and brown one-half the meat in the marrow,
stirring constantly. Put remaining half in stock pot with cold water,
add veal cut in small cubes, browned beef and bones. Let stand
thirty-five minutes. Bring slowly to boiling point, skim and let
simmer--closely covered--for three hours. Add chicken stock and
continue simmering for two hours. Melt butter in frying pan, add the
vegetables and cook five minutes, stirring constantly; then add to soup
with remaining ingredients. Cook one and one-half hours. Strain, cool,
remove fat and clear.


BREAD STICKS

          1 cup scalded milk or water.
          1/4 cup Cottolene.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 tablespoon sugar.
          1 yeast cake dissolved in
          1/4 cup lukewarm water.
          White 1 egg well beaten.
          3-3/4 to 4 cups of flour.

PROCESS: Put butter, salt and sugar in mixing bowl. Add milk. When
lukewarm add dissolved yeast cake, white of egg, and flour, reserving
one-half cup. Knead until smooth and elastic; cover and set to rise
until light, then shape first in small balls, then roll on the board
(without flour) with the hands until about seven inches in length, using
care that they are of a uniform size, rounding the ends. They should be
about the size of a lead pencil. Cover and let rise. Just before putting
them in the oven, brush them over lightly with melted butter and
sprinkle them with salt. Bake in a slow oven, browning them delicately.


ROAST VENISON

Wipe meat with a piece of cheese-cloth wrung from cold water, spread
meat generously with soft Cottolene and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Place on rack in dripping pan, and dredge meat and bottom of pan with
flour. Add three slices of onion, six slices of carrot, three stalks of
celery cut in inch pieces. Bake one hour in a hot oven, basting every
ten minutes for the first half-hour, afterwards occasionally. Serve with
the following Wine Sauce. (Mutton may be prepared in same manner).

WINE SAUCE

Put four tablespoons butter in a sauce-pan, brown richly; add five
tablespoons flour and continue browning, stirring constantly. Pour on
slowly one and one-half cups Brown Stock. Heat to boiling point and add
one-third cup Madeira Wine and one-third cup currant jelly previously
whipped. When jelly is well blended with sauce, strain and serve piping
hot.


MASHED SWEET POTATOES

Wash, pare thinly sweet potatoes, cover with boiling salted water and
cook until soft. Press them through potato ricer. There should be two
cups. Add four tablespoons butter, salt if necessary, and two
tablespoons hot cream or milk. Beat with a slotted spoon until very
light. Press again through potato ricer into hot dish.


CREAMED CELERY

Wash, scrape and cut celery in one-half inch pieces; there should be two
cups. Cover with boiling salted water and cook until tender. Drain and
reheat in one and one-fourth cups of

CREAM SAUCE

          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          2-1/2 tablespoons flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1-1/4 cups hot milk or thin cream.

PROCESS: Melt Cottolene in a sauce pan, add flour, salt and pepper, stir
to a smooth paste and pour on slowly hot milk or cream, stirring
constantly. Beat with a wire whip until smooth and glossy.


PEPPER AND FRUIT SALAD

Select the desired number of uniform-sized peppers, having half red and
half green. Cut a slice from the stem ends, remove the seeds and veins;
arrange them on beds of water cress, pepper grass, chicory or lettuce.
Fill peppers with the pulp of grapefruit cut in large cubes, Malaga
grapes skinned, seeded and cut in halves lengthwise, and butter nut
meats broken in pieces, allowing twice the quantity of grapefruit as
grapes and one cup of nut meats. Moisten with Mayonnaise Dressing. Fill
peppers. Place a rosette of Mayonnaise on top of each pepper, using
pastry bag and rose tube. Sprinkle the green peppers with finely chopped
green peppers, and the red peppers with chopped red peppers. Garnish top
of each with the half of a butternut meat.


NUT BREAD SANDWICHES

          1 cup scalded milk.
          1 tablespoon Cottolene.
          1-1/2 teaspoons salt.
          2 tablespoons sugar or molasses.
          1 yeast cake dissolved in
          1/4 cup lukewarm water.
          1 cup white flour.
          Entire wheat flour.
          1 cup pecan meats broken in pieces.

PROCESS: Put Cottolene, salt and sugar (or molasses) in a large mixing
bowl and pour on scalded milk; when lukewarm add dissolved yeast cake,
white flour, two cups entire wheat flour and nut meats. Mix well and
turn on a well-floured board. Add more flour and knead until dough is
smooth and elastic. Return to bowl, cover with a cloth; set to rise in a
warm place. When more than double its bulk, turn on slightly floured
board, knead and shape in a loaf. Place in a well-greased, brick-shaped
pan (pan should be half full). Cover, let rise again to top of pan and
bake in a moderate oven fifty minutes to one hour. When twenty-four
hours old, cut in thin slices, remove crusts, spread one-half the slices
generously with cream cheese, cover with remaining slices and cut in
triangles.


FROZEN RICE PUDDING WITH COMPOTE OF PINEAPPLE

          1/3 cup rice well washed.
          1 cup cold water.
          1-1/2 cups milk.
          Yolks 3 eggs.
          3/4 cup sugar.
          2 cups whipping cream.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Add cold water to rice and cook in double boiler thirty
minutes. Drain, return to double boiler, add milk and cook until rice is
tender, then rub through pur√©e strainer. Beat egg yolks very light, add
sugar and salt, then pour slowly on hot rice. Cook until mixture
thickens, cool and half freeze. Then fold in the cream, whipped until
stiff. Fill a round mould, pack in salt and ice, let stand two or three
hours. Drain slices of canned pineapple; add one-half cup sugar to
liquor and two shavings orange peel. Place on range and reduce slowly to
a thick syrup. Cut slices of pineapples in half crosswise, lay them in
syrup for two hours. Unmould pudding and garnish with the pineapple,
placing cut side down.


EDITOR'S NOTE:

_This menu would also prove very acceptable for a Thanksgiving Day
Dinner._

[Sidenote: _November_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTER SOUP

          CRISP OYSTER CRACKERS

          CELERY      PEPPER MANGOES

          ROAST TURKEY

          BREAD STUFFING      GIBLET SAUCE

          CRANBERRY JELLY

          MASHED POTATOES--BAKED HUBBARD SQUASH

          SWEET CORN, NEW ENGLAND STYLE      CREAMED ONIONS

          SPICED PEARS      HOT SLAW

          THANKSGIVING PUDDING      DRAWN BUTTER SAUCE

          PUMPKIN PIE      APPLE PIE

          FRUITS--NUTS--RAISINS--STUFFED DATES

          WATER BISCUIT--CHEESE

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTER SOUP

(For recipe see Page 162.)


ROAST TURKEY

Select a plump, ten-pound young turkey; dress, clean, stuff and truss in
shape; place it on thin slices of fat pork laid in the bottom of
dripping pan; rub the entire surface with salt, sprinkle with pepper and
dredge with flour. Place in a hot oven and brown delicately. Turn and
brown back of turkey; then turn breast side up; continue browning and
basting every ten minutes until bird is evenly and richly browned. Add
two cups water to fat in pan; continue basting every fifteen minutes
until bird is tender, which may be determined by piercing leg with small
wooden skewer. It will require from three to three and one-half hours,
depending upon the age of the bird. If the turkey is browning too
rapidly, cover with a piece of heavy paper well-buttered, placed over
turkey buttered side down. Remove the skewer and strings before placing
it on serving platter.

GIBLET SAUCE

Drain the liquid from the pan in which the turkey was roasted. Take six
tablespoons of the fat, strain the latter through a fine sieve. Return
the strained fat to the dripping pan and place on the range. Add seven
tablespoons of flour, stir to a smooth paste and brown richly, being
careful not to burn the mixture. Then pour on slowly while stirring
constantly, three cups of stock (in which the neck, pinions and giblets
were cooked). Bring it to the boiling point, and season to taste. Chop
the giblets very fine, first removing the tough parts of the gizzard;
then reheat them in sauce, and serve.

GRANDMA'S BREAD STUFFING

Remove the crust from two small baker's loaves; slice and pick in small
bits; season with one-half teaspoon pepper, two and one-half teaspoons
salt, one-half teaspoon powdered sage, and one medium-sized onion finely
chopped; mix well, using two forks; melt two-thirds cup of butter in
three-fourths cup boiling water; add to first mixture; toss lightly with
forks; add two eggs slightly beaten, mix well, and fill well the body
and breast of turkey. If bread is very stale, more moisture may be
added. If a crumbly stuffing is desired, omit eggs.


CRANBERRY JELLY

Pick over and wash one quart cranberries. Seed two-thirds cup raisins;
add to cranberries; add one cup boiling water and boil twenty minutes.
Rub through a sieve, and add to pulp two cups sugar and two-thirds cups
scalded seeded raisins; cook five minutes, stirring constantly. Turn
into a mold previously wet with cold water. Chill and serve.


SWEET CORN NEW ENGLAND STYLE

Chop one can of corn or two cups of green corn fine. Add three eggs
slightly beaten, one-half tablespoon sugar, one teaspoon salt,
one-eighth teaspoon pepper, one tablespoon melted butter and two cups
scalded milk. Turn into a buttered baking dish or into individual
ramekins, and bake in a slow oven until solid or custard-like. Serve in
baking dish.


CREAMED ONIONS

Remove the skins from one dozen medium-sized onions, under water--to
prevent the odor from penetrating the fingers--or grease the fingers
before beginning to peel them. Drain, place them in a sauce-pan, and
cover with cold water; bring quickly to the boiling-point and boil five
minutes. Drain and cover with boiling salted water; let cook uncovered
until tender (about one hour), but not broken. Prepare a thin cream
sauce made as follows:

CREAM SAUCE

Melt three tablespoons butter in a sauce-pan; add three tablespoons
flour; stir to a smooth paste. Add one and one-half cups hot thin cream
or milk; season with salt and pepper. Reheat onions in sauce; turn in
hot serving-dish, and sprinkle with one-half teaspoon finely chopped
parsley.


HOT SLAW

Shave one-half head white cabbage as fine as possible, using a sharp
knife. Serve with a dressing made of yolks of two eggs slightly beaten;
add one-fourth cup each of hot water and hot vinegar, slowly beating
constantly, four tablespoons butter, a few drops onion juice, one-half
teaspoon salt, and sift in one-half teaspoon ground mustard and
one-eighth teaspoon pepper. Stir this mixture over hot water until it
thickens to the consistency of cream; add to cabbage; mix well; place on
range, stirring constantly until mixture is heated throughout. Two
tablespoons of sugar may be added.


THANKSGIVING PUDDING

          1/2 cup Cottolene creamed.
          1 cup molasses.
          1 cup buttermilk.
          3 cups flour.
          1 teaspoon soda.
          1-1/2 teaspoons salt.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/4 teaspoon cloves.
          1/2 teaspoon allspice.
          1/2 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1-1/2 cups seeded and shredded raisins.
          3/4 cup currants.
          3 tablespoons flour for dredging fruit.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene. Add molasses and milk. Sift flour, soda, salt
and spices together; add gradually to first mixture; beat thoroughly.
Mix raisins and currants; dredge them with flour and add to batter; mix
well. Turn into a well-buttered tube mold; fill two-thirds full; place
on buttered cover; set on trivet; surround with boiling water and steam
three hours. Serve with

DRAWN BUTTER SAUCE

          1/3 cup butter.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1-1/4 cups boiling water.
          1/3 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          1/4 cup brandy.
          1/8 teaspoon nutmeg.

PROCESS: Divide the butter into two equal parts. Melt one part in a
sauce-pan; add flour, and stir to a smooth paste; add boiling water
slowly, stirring constantly; let come to boiling point. Remove to side
of range, and add remaining butter in small bits; continue beating. Then
add salt, sugar, brandy and nutmeg. Beat again, and serve very hot.


PUMPKIN PIE

          1-1/2 cups steamed and strained pumpkin.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          1 cup soft brown sugar.
          1 tablespoon rose water.
          1 tablespoon brandy.
          Juice 1 lemon.
          Grated rind 1/2 lemon.
          1/2 teaspoon ginger.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/4 teaspoon cinnamon.
          2 eggs slightly beaten.
          1-1/2 cups milk.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given. Turn in pie-pan lined with
pastry. Bake in a hot oven for the first five minutes to set pastry;
then reduce heat and bake slowly twenty-five minutes.

[Sidenote: _November_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF ONION SOUP

          CELERY      MIXED PICKLES

          STEWED CHICKEN--TEA BISCUIT

          MASHED POTATOES

          SPICED WATERMELON RIND

          NOVEMBER SALAD

          SQUASH PIE--WHIPPED CREAM

          COFFEE      SWEET CIDER

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF ONION SOUP

          6 medium-sized onions sliced.
          1 quart cold water.
          1 green pepper chopped.
          2 cups scalded milk.
          3 tablespoons butter.
          4 tablespoons flour.
          1 egg yolk.
          Parmesan cheese.
          Salt and cayenne.

PROCESS: Cook onion and pepper in two tablespoons butter five minutes,
without browning; add water and cook until onions are soft (about forty
minutes). Rub through a sieve. Melt remaining butter, add flour and stir
to a paste; add gradually scalded milk, stirring constantly. Combine
mixtures, add seasonings. Heat to boiling point, remove from range, add
yolk of egg slightly beaten. Pass Parmesan cheese and hot, crisp
crackers. Two tablespoons cheese may be added to soup when adding egg
yolk. Serve very hot.


CHICKEN STEW WITH TEA BISCUIT

Dress, clean and cut up a fowl. Place in stew pan, cover with boiling
water. Add three slices onion, one stalk celery broken in pieces, six
slices carrot, spray of parsley, one-half teaspoon peppercorns and a
small bit bay leaf. Heat to boiling point, skim, cover and simmer
slowly until meat is tender; the last hour of cooking add one tablespoon
salt. Remove chicken, add one cup thin cream, strain stock and thicken
with flour diluted with cold milk or water. Add one-half tablespoon
finely chopped parsley. Serve with Tea Biscuit. If a richer sauce is
desired, butter may be added to stock.

TEA BISCUIT

          2 cups flour.
          4 tablespoons Cottolene.
          3/4 teaspoon salt.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          3/4 cup milk.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and baking powder, add Cottolene and
rub it in lightly with tips of fingers. Add milk and mix to a soft dough
with a knife. Toss on a floured board, pat and roll to one-half inch
thickness. Shape with a small biscuit cutter, place close in buttered
pan and bake 15 minutes in hot oven.


NOVEMBER SALAD

Arrange thin slices of crisp Spanish onion in nests of bleached chicory
leaves. Pile on onion Jonathan apples pared and cut in one-half inch
cubes, celery hearts cut in small pieces and fresh English walnut meats
cut in quarters. There should be an equal quantity of apples and celery,
and one cup of nut meats to two cups each of the others. Moisten with
Mayonnaise, sprinkle each portion with finely chopped green pepper.


SQUASH PIE

          1 cup squash steamed and strained.
          1 cup cream or rich milk.
          1 cup sugar.
          3 eggs slightly beaten.
          4 tablespoons brandy or Sherry.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1-1/4 teaspoons nutmeg.
          1 teaspoon ginger.
          Salt.

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients in the order given, stir until ingredients
are well blended. Line a deep, perforated pie pan with Rich Paste; brush
over with slightly beaten white of egg. Turn in squash mixture and bake
in a moderate oven. Serve cold with whipped cream sweetened and flavored
with mace.




_December_


          "_Merry Christmas to friends!
              Merry Christmas to foes!
            The world's bright with joy, so
              Forget all your woes.
            The earth's full of beauty, of
              Love and good cheer.
            Merry Christmas to all and a
              Happy New Year._"
                                    --_Anon._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _December_

_First Sunday_]




Menu

          SCOTCH POTATO SOUP

          PORK TENDERLOIN LYONNAISE

          BAKED APPLES

          SCALLOPED POTATOES      FRIED EGG PLANT

          BERMUDA SALAD

          APRICOT DUMPLINGS--HARD SAUCE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

SCOTCH POTATO SOUP

(For recipe see Page 38.)


PORK TENDERLOIN LYONNAISE

Wipe and split two large pork tenderloins in halves lengthwise; sprinkle
with salt, pepper and dredge with flour. Melt two tablespoons each of
Cottolene and butter in an iron frying pan, and brown tenderloin richly
on both sides in the hot fat. Remove to well-greased dripping pan and
add to fat three onions thinly sliced; cook until delicately browned,
stirring often. Sprinkle over onions two tablespoons flour, stir well.
Put two tablespoons vinegar into one-half cup hot water, add slowly to
onions, mix thoroughly. Lay tenderloins over onions, cover closely and
cook in the oven until meat is tender. Dispose tenderloin on hot serving
platter and pour over contents of frying pan. Vinegar may be omitted and
more water added.


BAKED APPLES

Wipe and core eight tart apples; arrange them in a granite dripping pan.
Fill cavities with sugar and drop one-fourth teaspoon butter on top of
each, sprinkle with cinnamon, sprinkle round one-half cup sugar and pour
on one cup cold water. Bake in a slow oven until soft, basting often
with syrup in pan. Dispose on serving dish and sprinkle with granulated
sugar.


SCALLOPED POTATOES

Wash, pare and slice six medium-sized potatoes. Butter a quart baking
dish, lay in a layer of potatoes, sprinkle with salt, pepper, and dot
over with bits of butter, dredge with flour and sprinkle lightly with
chives. Repeat until potatoes are used and two tablespoons each of
butter, flour and chives. Pour over one and one-half cups milk. Cover
and bake one hour in the oven. Remove cover and brown top. Serve in
baking dish.


BERMUDA SALAD

Slice thinly three or four Bermuda onions. Sprinkle with one tablespoon
sugar, one teaspoon salt and cover with ice water. Let stand three
hours. Drain and serve with French Dressing.


APRICOT DUMPLINGS

          2 cups flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 tablespoon Cottolene.
          1 cup thick cream.
          Apricots.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and baking powder, rub in Cottolene
with tips of fingers, add cream, cutting it into flour mixture with a
knife. Mix well. Turn on a floured board, knead slightly and roll out to
one-half inch thickness. Shape with a large biscuit-cutter and place two
halves of peeled apricots (drained from the syrup in the can) on each
circle. Enclose them, pressing edges of dough together. Place them in a
well-buttered granite dripping pan, one and one-half inches apart;
sprinkle round them one cup granulated sugar, pour around two and
one-half cups cold water. Bake in a hot oven twenty minutes, basting
three times during cooking. Serve with

HARD SAUCE

          1/2 cup butter.
          Sherry wine, brandy or vanilla.
          1 cup powdered sugar.
          Nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cream butter, add sugar slowly, stirring constantly (this gives
sauce a fine, smooth grain). Flavor as desired and pass through pastry
bag and rose tube onto serving dish. Sprinkle with nutmeg.

[Sidenote: _December_

_Second Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTER SOUP

          BOILED LEG OF MUTTON--CAPER SAUCE

          SAVORY RICE--STEAMED SQUASH

          STUFFED EGG PLANT

          LIMA BEAN SALAD

          GRAHAM BREAD SANDWICHES

          FIG PUDDING

          CAF√â NOIR

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTER SOUP

          1 quart select oysters.
          4 cups scalded milk.
          1 stalk celery broken in pieces.
          1/4 cup butter.
          3/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.

PROCESS: Place oysters in a colander; pour over one cup cold water. Take
up each oyster with the fingers to remove bits of shells, reserve the
liquor. Heat to boiling point and strain through double cheese cloth,
set aside. Scald milk with celery, remove celery and add strained oyster
liquor to milk. Plump oysters in their own liquor, take up with a
perforated skimmer and lay over butter and seasonings, place in a hot
soup tureen. Strain liquor into milk mixture and pour the latter over
oysters. Serve at once with crisp, hot oyster crackers.


BOILED LEG OF MUTTON

Wipe meat; pound gently all over with a cleaver. Place in a kettle and
cover with cold water, add one small carrot sliced, one turnip sliced,
four slices onion, two sprays parsley, a bit of bay leaf and one-half
teaspoon peppercorns. Cover and bring quickly to boiling point; boil
five minutes. Skim. Reduce heat and simmer until meat is tender (from
two to three hours). Add one tablespoon salt the last hour of cooking.
Serve with

CAPER SAUCE

          3 tablespoons butter.
          3 tablespoons flour.
          1-1/2 cups strained mutton broth (or hot water).
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          1/2 cup capers

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add flour mixed with seasonings.
Stir to a paste and pour on slowly broth in which mutton was boiled,
first removing fat. Beat until smooth and glossy, add capers and heat to
boiling point. Serve in sauce-boat.


SAVORY RICE

Cook one cup well-washed rice in three quarts of boiling water until
partially softened. Drain; add to rice two cups of well-seasoned White
Stock; turn into double boiler and steam until rice is soft and stock
absorbed. Stir in one-fourth cup butter, one tablespoon finely chopped
chives or parsley. Mix well with a fork and turn into hot serving dish.
Sprinkle with pepper.


STEAMED SQUASH

Cut a marrow squash in slices, remove the seeds and stringy portions,
pare and lay in a steamer. Cook over boiling water until tender. Drain
perfectly dry. Mash and season with butter, salt, pepper and a little
sugar. Serve hot with tiny dots of butter over top.


STUFFED EGG PLANT

Cut a slice from the stem end of a large egg plant. Remove the inside,
leaving a shell one-eighth inch thick. Cut pulp in one-half inch cubes,
and cook in boiling salted water until tender; drain. Cook two
tablespoons butter with one onion finely chopped, until delicately
colored (not brown), add one tablespoon finely chopped parsley. Mix with
egg plant, season with salt and pepper, and refill shell. Cover with
one-half cup buttered crumbs and bake in the oven until heated
throughout and crumbs are brown. Serve in shell.


LIMA BEAN SALAD

          2 cups or
          1 can lima beans.
          French dressing.
          Cream Dressing.
          2 hard-cooked eggs.
          1 tablespoon finely chopped chives.

PROCESS: Cook beans in boiling salted water until tender; drain. If
canned French lima beans are used, drain from liquor in can and rinse in
cold water. Cover beans with French Dressing, let stand one hour. Drain
and sprinkle with chives (onion juice may be used). Mix with Cream
Dressing and arrange in nests of lettuce heart leaves. Garnish with eggs
cut in quarters lengthwise; dip sharp edge in French Dressing, then in
finely chopped chives or parsley.


GRAHAM BREAD SANDWICHES

Rub one cream cheese to a paste, add six olives finely chopped and
one-half cup finely chopped pecans. Spread thin slices of graham bread
with chive butter. Spread an equal number slices of bread with cheese
mixture. Lay one of each together, press edges, trim off crusts and cut
diagonally across in triangles.

GRAHAM BREAD

          4 cups boiling water.
          2 tablespoons sugar.
          1 tablespoon salt.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1 yeast cake dissolved in
          1/2 cup lukewarm water.
          8 cups Graham flour.
          6 cups white flour.

PROCESS: Put sugar, salt and Cottolene in large mixing bowl. Pour on
boiling water; when lukewarm add dissolved yeast cake. Sift together
Graham and white flour, reserving one cup white flour for kneading. Add
flour gradually to water mixture, stirring constantly; beat as mixture
becomes stiff. Turn on a well-floured board and knead until dough is
smooth and elastic. Return dough to bowl, cover and set to rise in a
warm place. When dough has doubled its bulk, cut it down with a knife
without removing from bowl; cover and set to rise again. When double in
bulk, knead slightly, weigh dough and divide into one-pound loaves.
Shape loaves, place two loaves in each well-greased, brick-shaped bread
pan, brush between loaves with melted Cottolene. (There will be six
loaves.) Cover and set to rise; when light, bake one hour in a "bread
oven."

CHIVE BUTTER

Cream one-fourth cup butter; add two tablespoons very finely chopped
chives. Season with a few grains salt and cayenne.


FIG PUDDING

          1 cup chopped washed figs.
          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          3 eggs well beaten.
          2-1/2 cups soft bread crumbs.
          1/3 cup milk.
          1 cup soft brown sugar.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          Grated rind of half an orange.

PROCESS: Cover bread crumbs with milk. Mix Cottolene with figs. To the
milk mixture add eggs, sugar, salt and orange rind; combine mixtures.
Beat thoroughly and turn into a well-greased tube mold; cover and steam
three hours. Serve with Brandy or Vanilla Sauce.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _December_

_Third Sunday_]




Menu

          CREAM OF CARROT SOUP

          POT ROAST OF BEEF--MUSHROOM SAUCE

          BROWNED POTATOES      PARSLEY ONIONS

          PARSNIP FRITTERS

          CREAM COLD SLAW

          STEAMED SNOW BALLS--SAUCE SOUFFL√â

          COFFEE--TEA

       *       *       *       *       *

CREAM OF CARROT SOUP

          2 cups chopped carrots.
          1 small onion sliced.
          2 sprays parsley.
          1/4 cup washed rice.
          2 cups water.
          2 cups scalded milk.
          1/2 cup hot cream.
          1/4 cup butter.
          2 tablespoons flour.
          Salt, pepper.

PROCESS: Cook carrots in water until tender. Rub through sieve,
reserving the liquor. Cook rice in milk in double boiler until soft.
Saut√© onion a delicate brown in butter, add flour and stir to a paste.
Add carrot mixture to milk and pour slowly over flour paste, stirring
constantly; heat to boiling point and add cream. Strain into hot soup
tureen and sprinkle with finely chopped parsley.


POT ROAST

Wipe five pounds beef cut from top of round; put bits of fat in an iron
frying pan, shake over fire until tried out (there should be about
one-fourth cup fat). Rub meat over with salt, dredge with flour and sear
quickly over in hot fat turned into the pot in which meat is to roast.
Add one cup boiling water, cover closely and cook slowly until meat is
tender (about four or five hours), turn occasionally, add only
sufficient water to prevent meat burning. The last hour of cooking
sprinkle well with salt and pepper. Serve with brown gravy made from
liquor in pot.


MUSHROOM SAUCE

          4 tablespoons butter.
          5-1/2 tablespoons flour.
          2 cups brown stock.
          1/2 can small mushrooms.
          1 egg yolk slightly beaten.
          2 teaspoons butter.
          1/2 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
          1/2 teaspoon Kitchen Bouquet.
          Salt, pepper.

PROCESS: Brown butter richly (without burning) in a sauce-pan; add flour
and continue browning, stirring constantly. Pour on stock slowly,
continue stirring until sauce is smooth. Drain mushrooms from the liquor
and saut√© them delicately in butter. Remove from range, add egg yolk and
Worcestershire Sauce; add Brown Sauce slowly, stirring constantly.
Reheat over hot water and season with salt, pepper and Kitchen Bouquet.


BROWNED POTATOES

Pare the desired number of medium-sized potatoes; parboil ten minutes in
boiling salted water. Drain, dry and place in pan around roast beef,
veal or pork, fifty minutes before meat is done. Baste with the liquor
in pan and turn often to brown evenly.


PARSLEY ONIONS

Select the desired number of silver skin onions, medium size. Peel and
cover with boiling water, bring to boiling point, boil five minutes.
Drain and cover again with boiling salted water. Cook until tender,
drain and remove to serving dish. Melt one-third cup butter (for one
dozen onions) in same sauce-pan, add one teaspoon finely chopped
parsley. Pour butter over onions and sprinkle with black pepper.


PARSNIP FRITTERS

Wash and scrub parsnips. Cover with boiling water and cook until tender.
Drain, plunge in cold water and rub off skins with the hands. Mash and
rub them through a coarse sieve. Season with salt and pepper, moisten
with a little cream and butter. Flour the hands and shape mixture in
small, flat, oval cakes. Dredge them with flour and saut√© a golden brown
in melted butter, turning them as griddle cakes. Serve very hot.


CREAM COLD SLAW

Cut a firm, crisp, small head of cabbage in quarters. Cut out the stalk
and shave in very thin slices crosswise. Cover with ice water and when
crisp drain dry. Mix with the following Cream Dressing. Pile
pyramid-like in a glass serving dish, and serve very cold. If cabbage is
large, use half a head.

CREAM DRESSING

One cup thick sour cream (not old sour cream). Chill and stir in one
teaspoon salt, a few grains cayenne, three tablespoons fine sugar and
three tablespoons vinegar, diluted with one tablespoon cold water. Beat
well and pour over cabbage, toss lightly with a fork and sprinkle with
one teaspoon finely chopped parsley.


STEAMED SNOW BALLS

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup fine sugar.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2-1/2 cups pastry flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          Whites 4 eggs beaten until stiff.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon orange extract.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Mix
and sift flour, baking powder and salt; add to first mixture alternately
with milk. Add extract. Cut and fold in whites of eggs. Fill buttered
pop-over cups two-thirds full, place in steamer, cover steamer with a
folded crash tea towel, cover closely and steam forty-five minutes.
Serve with orange sauce or in nests of Whipped Cream, sweetened and
flavored with Vanilla.

EDITORS NOTE:

_This will also be found a very acceptable menu for a Christmas Dinner._

[Sidenote: _December_

_Fourth Sunday_]




Menu

          OYSTER COCKTAILS

          CREAM OF ALMOND SOUP EN TASSE--BREAD STICKS

          CELERY      RIPE OLIVES

          BRACE OF DUCKS--STUFFING

          OLIVE SAUCE

          GLAZED SWEET POTATOES--"THORN" APPLES

          HAWAIIAN SALAD

          PLUM PUDDING--BRANDY SAUCE

          CHOCOLATE CAKE

          BON BONS--NUTS AND RAISINS--FRUITS

          CAF√â NOIR--WATER BISCUIT--CHEESE

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTER COCKTAILS

          1 tablespoon fresh grated horseradish.
          1 tablespoon vinegar.
          2 tablespoons lemon juice.
          1 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
          3 tablespoons tomato catsup.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          Few drops Tobasco Sauce.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given. Chill thoroughly and pour
over oyster cocktails. Place six small oysters in each cocktail glass,
add sauce and serve very cold. This sauce is sufficient for six
cocktails. Oyster Cocktails may be served very attractively in tomato
cups.


CREAM OF ALMOND SOUP

          2 quarts chicken or white stock.
          1-1/2 tablespoons butter.
          3/4 cup blanched almonds.
          2 tablespoons cornstarch.
          1 cup hot cream.
          Salt, pepper.
          Few grains nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cook the butter and flour together in a sauce-pan; add
gradually hot stock until of the consistency to pour; then add
remaining stock, let cook gently twenty minutes. Chop almonds fine,
then pound them to a paste, add to first mixture and beat until
thoroughly blended. Add hot cream and seasoning. Serve en tasse;
sprinkle each portion with finely chopped parsley.


ROAST BRACE OF DUCKS

Dress and clean a brace (two) young domestic or wild ducks. Truss same
as goose. If domestic ducks are used they may be stuffed. In the wild
ducks place in each a head of celery; this is thought to improve their
flavor. Domestic ducks should always be cooked "well done" and twice as
long as wild ducks. Place the ducks on rack in dripping pan, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, cover breast and legs with very thin slices of fat
salt pork. Place in a hot oven and roast one and one-quarter hours,
basting every five minutes (with fat in pan) for the first half hour,
afterwards every ten minutes. Domestic ducks require a hotter oven than
wild ducks or fowl. When tender, remove string and skewers. Place on hot
serving platter, surround with Thorn Apples and serve with Olive sauce.

STUFFING

          2 cups cracker crumbs.
          1 cup English walnut meats broken in small bits.
          1 cup thick cream.
          1/2 cup butter.
          1 onion finely chopped.
          1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
          1/2 teaspoon celery salt.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/8 teaspoon black pepper.

PROCESS: Crush crackers with the hands, not too fine. Add nut meats,
butter melted, cream, onion and parsley; mix well with a fork; add
seasonings. If stuffing appears too dry add more cream (a cup of chopped
apple or celery may be added). This is sufficient stuffing for one duck.

OLIVE SAUCE

          4 tablespoons butter.
          1 slice onion.
          5-1/2 tablespoons flour.
          2 cups Brown Stock.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/4 teaspoon pepper.
          1 dozen olives.

PROCESS: Melt butter in sauce-pan, add onion and cook until delicately
browned; remove onion and stir butter until well browned; add flour
sifted with seasonings, stir to a smooth paste and continue browning.
Add stock gradually, beating constantly. Pare the meat from olive pits,
leaving it in one continuous curl. Cover with boiling water and cook six
or seven minutes. Drain and add to Sauce.


GLAZED SWEET POTATOES

Wash and pare six medium-sized sweet potatoes. Parboil ten minutes in
boiling salted water; drain and cut lengthwise in halves. Arrange them
in a well-buttered granite dripping pan. Make a syrup by boiling one cup
sugar with one-half cup water and two tablespoons butter three or four
minutes. Dip each piece of potato into syrup and arrange in dripping
pan. Bake until potatoes are tender (about forty minutes) basting two or
three times with remaining syrup. Oven should not be too hot as these
potatoes will scorch easily.


"THORN" APPLES

Prepare a syrup by boiling two cups sugar and one and three-fourths cups
water ten minutes. Wash, wipe, core and pare the desired number of
apples (about eight for this quantity of syrup). Drop apples into syrup
when pared, to prevent discoloration. Cook until tender, skimming syrup
when necessary. Use a deep sauce-pan for this purpose, as apples cook
better when covered with syrup. Better cook four apples at a time. Drain
from syrup and fill the cavities with quince jelly and stick apples
thickly with blanched and shredded almonds slightly toasted. Cut the
almonds lengthwise in three pieces, then divide, making six "thorns." It
is best to toast them in the oven until they are a golden brown.


HAWAIIAN SALAD

Arrange slices of canned Hawaiian pineapple, drained from the liquor in
the can, in nests of crisp lettuce heart leaves. Pile on these Malaga
grapes peeled, cut in halves lengthwise and seeds removed, mixed with an
equal quantity of English walnut meats broken in pieces. Sprinkle
thickly with candied cherries, cut in fine shreds or chopped. Moisten
with French Dressing No. 2.

FRENCH DRESSING NO. 2

          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/4 teaspoon paprika.
          Few grains cayenne.
          6 tablespoons olive oil.
          2 tablespoons lemon juice or
          1 tablespoon Tarragon vinegar and
          1 of lemon juice.

PROCESS: Put dry ingredients in bowl, add oil, mix well, then add lemon
juice slowly while stirring constantly. Chill thoroughly and use on
Fruit Salad.


PLUM PUDDING

          1/2 lb. stale bread crumbs.
          1 cup scalded milk.
          1/3 cup soft brown sugar.
          5 eggs.
          1 cup raisins seeded and shredded.
          3/4 cup English currants.
          1/2 cup English walnut meats chopped.
          2/3 cup figs chopped fine.
          1/2 cup citron cut in thin shreds.
          2/3 cup Cottolene.
          1/4 cup brandy.
          1/2 grated nutmeg.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/2 teaspoon mace.
          1/2 teaspoon cloves.
          1-1/2 teaspoons salt.

PROCESS: Add crumbs to milk and let soak one or more hours. Add sugar,
yolks of eggs beaten very light, fruits mixed with nut meats and citron.
Cream Cottolene and add to first mixture, then brandy and spices sifted
together. Fold in whites of eggs beaten stiff; mix thoroughly and turn
into a well-greased tube mold and steam five to six hours. Remove from
mold to hot serving platter. Garnish with sprays of holly, pour around
brandy, light with a taper and send to table en flambeau (in a flame).
Serve with Brandy Sauce.

BRANDY SAUCE

          1/2 cup butter.
          1 cup confectioners' sugar.
          Whites 2 eggs beaten stiff.
          1/8 teaspoon salt.
          2/3 cup heavy cream whipped stiff.
          2 tablespoons brandy.
          1 tablespoon Jamaica rum.
          Grating nutmeg.

PROCESS: Cream butter, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Place
over hot water, add eggs and beat with a Gem whip until evenly blended,
cool slightly and add brandy, rum and salt. Fold in cream and sprinkle
with nutmeg.

[Sidenote: _December_

_Fifth Sunday_]




Menu

          CONSOMM√â WITH BARLEY

          ROAST LOIN OF PORK--BROWN GRAVY

          APPLE RINGS

          BAKED SWEET POTATOES

          SPICED PEACHES

          APPLE AND DATE SALAD

          CRANBERRY TARTS--CHEESE

          COFFEE

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSOMM√â WITH BARLEY

          2 quarts consomm√©.
          2 tablespoons pearl barley.
          2 quarts boiling water.
          Salt.
          Chives or Parsley.

PROCESS: Soak barley in cold water over night; drain and cook in boiling
salted water until soft. Drain and reheat in consomm√©. Sprinkle in
one-half tablespoon finely chopped chives or parsley. Serve with crisp
crackers.


ROAST LOIN OF PORK

Wipe a five-pound loin of pork (little pig if possible); sprinkle with
salt, pepper, powdered sage and dredge with flour. Place in dripping
pan, surround with some of the fat cut in small cubes. Set to cook in a
moderate oven for four hours, basting every ten minutes for the first
half hour and afterwards every fifteen minutes, with dripping in pan.
Remove to serving platter, surround with Apple Rings and make a gravy
same as for other roast meats.


APPLE RINGS

Pare, core and cut apples that are not too sour, in rings one-half inch
thick. Sprinkle them with lemon juice. Make a syrup by cooking one cup
sugar with one cup water, ten minutes. Drop in three or four Cassia buds
or pieces of stick cinnamon. Cook three or four apple rings at a time in
syrup until soft, turning often to preserve their shape. Drain and
arrange them around roast loin of pork. The syrup may be used for
stewing apples or prunes.


BAKED SWEET POTATOES

Select smooth sweet potatoes of uniform size. Wash and scrub with a
vegetable brush. Bake same as white potatoes. When soft, break the
skins, put into each a teaspoon butter and serve hot.


APPLE AND DATE SALAD

Pare and core three Jonathan apples. Cut them Julienne style (in
straws); there should be two cups. Sprinkle apples with lemon juice to
prevent discoloration. Clean one-half pound of dates, remove skins and
stones; let them dry off in the oven. When cold cut each date in strips,
same as apples. Mix apples and dates and marinate them with French
Dressing. Let stand one hour. Then add one-half cup almonds cut in
shreds lengthwise. Mix well and serve in nests of lettuce heart leaves.
Mask with Mayonnaise Dressing.


CRANBERRY TARTS

Roll Rich Paste one-eighth inch thick; cut in three-inch squares. Put
one or two teaspoons Cranberry mixture on one side of square, moisten
the edges with water, fold in triangle shape. Crimp the edges and prick
over top with fork. Bake same as pies. Sprinkle with fine sugar. Serve
hot with cheese.

CRANBERRY MIXTURE

          2 cups cranberries chopped moderately.
          1/2 cup raisins seeded and chopped.
          1-1/2 cups sugar.
          1/3 cup water.
          Few grains salt.
          1 tablespoon butter.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given (except butter). Cook until
soft, stirring constantly. Add butter, chill mixture. Use for pie with
one crust and decorate, when baked, with pastry cut in fancy shapes and
baked on a tin sheet, or use for filling tarts.




_Supplementary Recipes_

          _Including recipes for a few cakes for special
          occasions, a variety of cookies suitable for use
          at any time, together with a selection of
          breakfast cakes, muffins, rolls, etc., that would
          not usually come within the compass of a dinner
          menu._


BRIDE'S CAKE

          1/2 cup Cottolene.
          2 cups fine granulated sugar.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2-1/2 cups pastry flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon orange extract
          Whites of 8 eggs.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, beating constantly. Mix
and sift flour with baking powder and salt; add alternately to first
mixture with milk, continue beating. Add extract, and cut and fold in
the whites of eggs beaten until stiff and dry. Fill a tube cake pan
well-greased with Cottolene, two-thirds full, and bake fifty minutes in
a moderate oven. When slightly cool, spread with Ornamental Frosting.


TWELVE POUND FRUIT CAKE

"GROOM'S CAKE"

          1/2 pound Cottolene.
          1 pound brown sugar rolled.
          Yolks 12 eggs well beaten.
          2 cups N. O. Molasses.
          1 pound flour.
          1/2 tablespoon cinnamon.
          1 teaspoon cloves.
          1/2 tablespoon mace.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 teaspoon soda.
          Whites 12 eggs beaten stiff.
          2-1/2 pounds seeded raisins.
          3 pounds currants.
          1 pound citron thinly sliced and cut in shreds.
          1/2 pound candied cherries cut in quarters.
          1/4 pound candied orange peel finely chopped.
          1/4 pound candied lemon peel finely chopped.
          1/4 cup brandy.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly; add
egg yolks, continue stirring and beating, add molasses, flour mixed and
sifted with spices, salt and soda; fold in the whites of eggs and lastly
add the fruit except citron. Turn mixture into a well-greased pan lined
with several thicknesses of heavy paper, put citron into mixture in
layers, having a layer of batter on top. Divide the mixture equally in
two tube pans, eight inches in diameter, filling pans two-thirds full.
Bake two and three-quarter hours.


NEW ENGLAND ELECTION CAKE

          1 cup bread dough slightly rounded.
          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          2 eggs.
          1 cup soft brown sugar.
          1/2 cup sour milk.
          2/3 cup seeded and shredded raisins.
          6 large figs chopped fine.
          1-1/4 cups flour.
          1/2 teaspoon soda.
          1/4 teaspoon cloves.
          1/2 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1/2 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene and work it in the dough with the hand. Add
eggs well beaten, sugar, soda dissolved in milk, fruit dredged with
one-fourth cup flour, remainder flour mixed and sifted with spices and
salt. Beat thoroughly with the hand. Turn mixture into a well-buttered,
brick-shaped bread pan, cover and let rise for one and a quarter hours
in a warm place. Bake one hour in a moderate oven. Spread with

MILK FROSTING

          1-1/2 cups granulated sugar.
          1/2 cup rich milk.
          1 teaspoon butter.
          1/4 teaspoon each vanilla and lemon extract.

PROCESS: Melt butter in sauce-pan; add sugar and milk. Stir constantly
that sugar may not stick to saucepan, bring to boiling point and cook
without stirring twelve to fourteen minutes. Remove from range and beat
until of the consistency to spread; add flavoring and pour over cake,
spread evenly with spatula. When frosting is firm, crease at once with
the dull edge of a silver knife. When eggs are high in price, this
frosting will prove very acceptable.


CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE

          4 squares chocolate.
          3 tablespoons boiling water.
          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1-1/2 cups sugar.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2 cups pastry flour.
          2 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          3 eggs.
          1/2 teaspoon Vanilla.

PROCESS: Melt chocolate over hot water, add boiling water and cook over
hot water until smooth, stirring constantly. Cream Cottolene, add sugar
gradually, stirring constantly; add chocolate mixture. Add yolks of eggs
well beaten. Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt, add alternately
to first mixture with milk. Add flavoring, and cut and fold in the
stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Turn into buttered layer cake pans and
bake fifteen minutes in a hot oven. Spread with Boiled Frosting (for
recipe see Page 56) and sprinkle with shredded toasted almonds before
frosting sets.


VALENTINE CAKES

          2/3 cup Cottolene.
          2 cups sugar.
          4 eggs.
          1 cup milk.
          3-1/4 cups flour.
          4-1/2 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon rose water.
          1/4 teaspoon mace.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add gradually one cup sugar. Beat egg yolk
thick and light, add gradually remaining cup sugar. Combine mixtures.
Mix and sift flour, baking powder, mace and salt. Add alternately to
first mixture with milk, add rose water. Then cut and fold in the
stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Bake in small heart-shaped individual
tins. Cover with frosting and outline the edge with tiny red candies.


SEED CAKES

          2/3 cup Cottolene.
          2 cups sugar.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          1 teaspoon soda.
          1 cup buttermilk.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          Flour.
          1-1/2 tablespoons caraway seeds.
          Raisins.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, add well beaten egg, soda
dissolved in milk, salt, seeds, and flour to make a soft dough. Chill
the dough and shape as other cookies. Place a seeded raisin or the half
of a pecan nut meat in center of each before baking.


CHOCOLATE NUT AND FRUIT COOKIES

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup sugar.
          1/4 cup grated chocolate.
          2 extra tablespoons sugar.
          2 tablespoons boiling water.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          1 cup nut meats chopped.
          1 cup raisins seeded and shredded.
          2-1/4 cups flour.
          3 tablespoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Melt
chocolate over hot water, add the two extra tablespoons sugar and
boiling water. Cook one minute; when cool add to first mixture. Add
beaten eggs. Mix and sift flour (reserving one-fourth cup), baking
powder and salt. Add to cake mixture. Add fruit and nut meats dredged
with remaining flour. Chill mixture. Drop from spoon onto a well-greased
baking sheet one and one-half inches apart; press a raisin or the half a
nut meat in center of each cake and bake in a moderate oven.


RAISIN CAKELETS

          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          1 cup fine sugar.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          Yolk 1 egg.
          1/2 cup milk.
          2 cups flour.
          3 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup raisins seeded and cut in pieces.
          1 tablespoon flour.
          Blanched and shredded almonds.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Add
beaten egg yolk and eggs. Mix and sift flour, baking powder and salt.
Add to first mixture alternately with milk; add raisins dredged with
tablespoon flour. Beat thoroughly and fill small, buttered individual
tins two-thirds full. Strew tops with almonds, sprinkle with powdered
sugar and bake twelve to fifteen minutes in a moderate oven.


PLAIN GINGER CAKES

          1 cup N. O. molasses.
          2 teaspoons soda.
          1/2 cup Cottolene.
          1/2 cup boiling water.
          4 cups flour.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 tablespoon ginger.
          1 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/4 teaspoon cloves.

PROCESS: Add soda to molasses. Melt Cottolene in boiling water; combine
in mixing bowl. Mix and sift flour, salt and spices, add to first
mixture and beat thoroughly. Chill dough and roll a small portion at a
time to one-half inch thickness, shape with a round cutter. Press a
seeded raisin in top of each, sprinkle with coarse granulated sugar.
Bake in a moderate oven. It may be necessary to add more flour, as flour
varies in thickening properties.


BROWNIES

          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1 egg well beaten.
          1/4 cup powdered sugar.
          1/3 cup bread flour.
          1/3 cup N. O. molasses.
          3/4 cup pecan nut meats broken in small bits.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon ginger.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene and sugar gradually, add molasses, beaten egg,
flour sifted with salt, ginger and nut meats. Bake in very small
well-greased, iron gem or brownie cups. Place one-half pecan nut meat on
top of each cake.


BRANDY SNAPS

          1/2 cup molasses.
          1/4 cup Cottolene.
          7/8 cup flour.
          2/3 cup granulated sugar.
          1 tablespoon ginger.
          1/4 teaspoon nutmeg.
          1/8 teaspoon salt.

PROCESS: Put molasses in sauce-pan, bring to boiling point; add
Cottolene and, when melted, add flour sifted with sugar, ginger, nutmeg
and salt. Drop from tip of spoon in small portions on a buttered tin
sheet, about three inches apart. Bake in a slow oven. When slightly
cool, remove from sheet with a spatula and roll over the handle of a
wooden spoon. Lay on cake cooler until crisp.


BAKING POWDER BISCUITS

          2 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          3/4 cup milk or water.

PROCESS: Sift together flour, baking powder and salt. Add shortening and
rub into flour with tips of fingers, using a light touch. Add milk or
water, mix with a knife to a soft dough. Turn on a lightly floured
board; knead slightly. Pat and roll to one-half inch thickness. Shape
with small biscuit cutter. Place close together in a buttered pan and
bake in a hot oven fifteen minutes.


CREAM FRUIT ROLLS

          2 cups pastry flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 tablespoon Cottolene.
          1 cup cream.
          Dates.

PROCESS: Sift together flour, salt and baking powder; add shortening and
rub in with tips of fingers. Add cream, mix with knife to a soft dough.
Turn on a lightly floured board; pat and roll to one-third inch
thickness. Cut with biscuit cutter, place one-half of a stoned date on
half of biscuit, brush edges with milk and fold as Parker House Rolls.
Press edges together, brush top of rolls with milk and place one-half
date on top of each. Bake on a buttered sheet in a hot oven fifteen
minutes.


LITTLE CREAM BISCUIT

          2 cups pastry flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          1 tablespoon Cottolene.
          3/4 cup of rich cream.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and baking powder. Rub in Cottolene
with tips of fingers. Cut the cream into mixture with a silver knife.
When well mixed, toss on a well-floured board, pat and roll one-half
inch thick. Shape with very small biscuit cutter (size of silver
dollar), brush the top over with milk and bake twelve to fifteen minutes
in a hot oven.


WHEAT MUFFINS

          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1/4 cup sugar.
          3/4 cup thin cream or milk.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          2 cups flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 egg beaten very light.

PROCESS: Cream the Cottolene with a wooden spoon. Add sugar gradually,
then alternately cream and flour sifted with baking powder and salt. Add
well-beaten egg. Bake in hot, well-buttered gem cups. A cup of
blueberries may be added to this mixture for blueberry tea cakes or
one-fourth pound dates may be stoned, chopped and added to the butter
and sugar for date muffins.


GRAHAM MUFFINS

          1 cup Graham flour.
          1 cup white flour.
          1/4 cup sugar or molasses.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup milk.
          1 egg beaten very light.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.

PROCESS: Sift together flours, sugar, salt and baking powder. Add milk
gradually, egg beaten very light and melted Cottolene. Beat mixture
thoroughly. Bake in hot, buttered, iron gem cups twenty-five minutes in
a hot oven.


CORN MUFFINS

          1 cup corn meal.
          1 cup white flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/4 cup sugar.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup thin cream or milk.
          2 eggs beaten very light.
          2 tablespoons Cottolene.

PROCESS: Sift together corn meal, flour, baking powder, sugar and salt.
Add cream or milk and stir to a smooth batter. Add well beaten eggs and
melted butter. Beat thoroughly and bake in hot buttered gem cups in a
hot oven twenty minutes.


POPOVERS

          1 cup flour.
          1/4 teaspoon salt.
          7/8 cup milk.
          1 teaspoon melted Cottolene.
          2 eggs beaten very light.

PROCESS: Sift flour and salt together, add milk gradually, beating
continuously. Add melted Cottolene and beaten eggs. Beat batter with a
Dover egg beater three or four minutes until it is perfectly smooth,
creamy and full of bubbles. Pour into hissing-hot, well-greased gem cups
and bake in a hot oven thirty to thirty-five minutes. They may also be
baked in earthen custard cups. When baked in the latter vessel they will
have a glazed appearance.


SOUR MILK GRIDDLE CAKES

          2-1/2 cups flour.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 tablespoon Cottolene.
          2 cups rich sour milk.
          1-1/4 teaspoons soda.
          1 egg lightly beaten.

PROCESS: Mix and sift flour, salt and soda. Add sour milk and beat to a
smooth batter. Add Cottolene and well-beaten egg; continue beating until
ingredients are thoroughly blended. Batter should be smooth and creamy.
Drop by spoonsful on well-greased, hot griddle; grease griddle with
melted Cottolene. Cook on one side and, when light and covered with
bubbles, turn and cook on the other side.


WAFFLES

          3-1/2 cups flour.
          2 tablespoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          2 cups milk.
          Yolks 4 eggs.
          Whites 4 eggs.
          1 tablespoon melted Cottolene.

PROCESS: Mix and sift dry ingredients, add milk gradually, beating
constantly. Add Cottolene, yolks of eggs well-beaten and whites of eggs
beaten stiff. Beat mixture thoroughly. Cook in well-greased, hot waffle
iron (use melted Cottolene for greasing waffle iron), browning first on
one side, then turn iron and brown on the other. Serve with maple or
lemon syrup.


GERMAN COFFEE CAKE

          1 cup scalded milk.
          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1/3 cup sugar.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1 compressed yeast cake dissolved in 1/4 cup lukewarm water.
          1 egg well beaten.
          1/2 cup seeded and shredded raisins.
          Flour.

PROCESS: Put Cottolene, sugar and salt in mixing bowl; add scalded milk.
When lukewarm add dissolved yeast cake, beaten egg and sufficient flour
to make a very thick batter. Beat thoroughly until mixture is smooth.
Add raisins, cover closely and set to rise. When light, spread dough in
buttered dripping pan one inch in thickness; cover and let rise again.
Before placing in the oven, brush over with beaten egg and cover with
the following mixture:

Melt one-third cup butter in a sauce-pan, add one-half cup sugar, mix
with one and one-half teaspoons cinnamon. When sugar is partially melted
add one and one-half tablespoons flour. Mix well and spread on cake,
strew top with blanched and shredded almonds, bake twenty-five minutes
in a moderate oven.


SALAD ROLLS

          1 cup scalded milk.
          1-1/2 cups flour.
          3 tablespoons sugar.
          1/8 cup melted Cottolene.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          2 eggs well beaten.
          1 compressed yeast cake dissolved in
          1/4 cup lukewarm water.
          3/4 teaspoon grated lemon rind.
          Flour.

PROCESS: Put sugar and salt in mixing bowl, pour on scalded milk. When
lukewarm add dissolved yeast cake and one and one-half cups flour, beat
thoroughly; cover and let rise; when light add melted Cottolene, well
beaten eggs, grated lemon rind and just enough flour to knead. Cover and
set to rise again; when light turn on a floured board, knead slightly;
roll to one-half inch thickness, shape with very small biscuit cutter,
then roll each biscuit in the shape of a finger roll. Place on a
buttered sheet an inch and one-half apart; set to rise, and bake fifteen
minutes in a hot oven. Five minutes before removing from oven, brush
over tops with white of one egg slightly beaten, diluted with one
tablespoon milk.


CINNAMON ROLLS

          2 cups scalded milk.
          2/3 cup sugar.
          1 compressed yeast cake in 1/2 cup lukewarm water.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          4 tablespoons granulated sugar.
          3 eggs lightly beaten.
          1/2 teaspoon cinnamon.
          1/3 cup Cottolene.
          Flour.

PROCESS: Prepare a sponge when scalded milk is lukewarm by adding two
cups flour and dissolved yeast cake; beat thoroughly; cover and set to
rise. When light, add well beaten eggs, Cottolene worked to a creamy
consistency, sugar, salt and flour enough to knead (about six and
one-half cups). Knead until smooth and elastic. Roll out to one-fourth
inch thickness, spread generously with soft butter, sprinkle thickly
with sugar and cinnamon, mixed and sifted. Roll like jelly roll; cut off
slices one-half inch thick; set them close together, cut side down, in a
greased dripping pan. Brush between rolls with melted Cottolene, cover
and set to rise. When light, bake thirty minutes in a moderate oven,
remove from oven and brush over with white of egg diluted with two
tablespoons cold milk. Return to oven to brown; repeat, to make them
glossy.


BLUEBERRY TEA CAKE

          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1/2 cup sugar.
          1 egg.
          2-2/3 cups bread flour.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1 teaspoon salt.
          1 cup milk.
          3/4 cup berries.

PROCESS: Cream Cottolene, add sugar gradually, stirring constantly. Add
egg beaten thick and light. Mix and sift flour (except three
tablespoons), baking powder and salt; add to first mixture alternately
with milk. Sprinkle remaining flour over berries and fold them in
quickly. Bake in well greased shallow pan thirty minutes in a moderate
oven. Serve hot with Hard Sauce or cream, or with butter.


DOUGHNUTS

          3 eggs.
          1-1/3 cups sugar.
          3 tablespoons Cottolene.
          5 cups bread flour.
          1 teaspoon nutmeg.
          2 teaspoons salt.
          1-1/4 cups sour cream.
          1-1/2 teaspoons soda.

PROCESS: Beat eggs very light without separating the whites and yolks;
add sugar gradually, beating constantly; add Cottolene and continue
beating. Mix and sift flour, nutmeg, salt, and soda, add alternately to
first mixture with sour cream. Chill dough, then toss on a slightly
floured board, roll to one-half inch thickness; shape with cutter and
fry in deep, hot Cottolene. Drain on soft brown paper. When cool,
sprinkle with powdered sugar.


CRULLERS

          4 tablespoons Cottolene.
          1-1/4 cup sugar.
          2 eggs.
          4 cups flour.
          1/4 teaspoon nutmeg.
          4 teaspoons baking powder.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          3/4 cup milk.
          1/4 cup Sherry wine.
          Cinnamon and powdered sugar.

PROCESS: Cream the Cottolene, add sugar gradually, beating constantly.
Add yolks beaten thick and light, and whites beaten stiff and dry. Mix
and sift flour, salt, nutmeg and baking powder, add to first mixture
alternately with milk; add Sherry wine. Turn onto a well-floured board
and pat and roll to one-eighth inch thickness. Cut in pieces three
inches long by two and one-half inches wide, make four parallel gashes
lengthwise of each cruller, at equal distances apart; lift each by
running fingers through gashes and drop carefully into hot Cottolene;
turn when they rise to top of fat. When cooked, drain on brown paper and
sprinkle with powdered sugar mixed with a little cinnamon.


FRIED OYSTERS (IN CRACKER MEAL)

Wash the desired number of New York Counts, using one cup cold water to
a quart of oysters. Drain and dry them between crash towels. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper, dredge with flour and dip them, one at a time, in
egg, diluted with two tablespoons cold water to each egg. Then dip in
fine cracker meal. It is very important that each oyster is well covered
with crumbs. Fry in deep hot Cottolene to a golden brown. Drain on brown
paper, garnish with stuffed olives and sprays of parsley.


FRIED OYSTERS (IN BATTER)

Follow directions in the foregoing recipe, and dip oysters in batter
(see next page). Fry in deep hot Cottolene, turn occasionally. Drain and
serve on folded napkin, garnished with curled celery and slices of lemon
rind dipped in finely chopped parsley.

BATTER

          1 cup bread flour.
          1/2 teaspoon salt.
          1/2 teaspoon celery salt.
          1/8 teaspoon pepper.
          2 eggs.
          3/4 cup milk.

PROCESS: Mix and sift dry ingredients; add milk slowly, beating
constantly until batter is smooth. Beat eggs thick and light, cut and
fold them into batter. Beat thoroughly and dip the drained and dried
oysters into batter, one by one, and fry in deep, hot Cottolene.


COD FISH BALLS

          1 cup "picked up" codfish.
          2-2/3 cups potatoes.
          1 egg well beaten.
          1 tablespoon butter.
          Few grains pepper.

PROCESS: Wash fish and cover with cold water; let stand several hours,
"pick up" in small pieces. Wash, pare and cut potatoes in small cubes,
measure them, soak in cold water for an hour; cook with fish in boiling
water until potatoes are soft. Drain through a sieve until quite dry;
return to sauce-pan in which they were cooked, mash thoroughly that
there may be no lumps left in potatoes. Add butter, egg and pepper. Beat
with a slotted wooden spoon until very light. Season with salt if
necessary. Take up by rounded tablespoons, place in croquette basket and
fry one minute in deep hot Cottolene (frying six fish balls at a time);
drain on brown paper. Allow fat to reheat between fryings.


MA√éTRE D'H√îTEL BUTTER

PROCESS: Cream four tablespoons butter with a wooden spoon; add one-half
teaspoon salt, one-eighth teaspoon pepper and a few grains cayenne, in
the order given; also one-half tablespoon finely chopped parsley, and
three-fourths tablespoon lemon juice, drop by drop, beating constantly.
This is used as a dressing for certain kinds of fish.




INDEX


                                                            PAGE

  Alabama Salad                                               50

  Ambrosia                                                    27

  Anise Seed Wafers                                           27

  Apple, Baked                                               160
    Baked and Stuffed with Figs                              138
    Cake with Lemon Sauce                                     37
    Crab, Spiced                                             147
    and Date Salad                                           174
    Pie (Plain Paste)                                        124
    Rings                                                    173
    Sauce, Chantilly                                          17
    Sauce, Spiced                                             38
    Thorn                                                    171

  Apricot Dumplings                                          161
    Frozen                                                   117
    Sauce, Dried                                              46

  Asparagus, Cream of                                         66
    Salad                                                     72
    Tips in Croustades                                        85
    with Butter Sauce                                         70


  Banana Baked (Sultana Sauce)                                60
    Fritters                                                 126
    Sauce                                                     24

  Beans, Boiled, White                                        39
    String, Buttered                                          36
    String, Salad                                             91
    Stringless, with Bacon                                    67

  B√©chamel Sauce                                              85

  Beef, Boiled                                                23
    Corned, boiled with Vegetables                            73
    Braised                                                  139
    Fillets, Pan Broiled                                     108
    Fillet Roast                                             125
    Pot Roast                                                166
    Rolled Rib Roast                                         146
    Spiced                                                   114
    Tongue, Braised                                           29

  Beets, Buttered                                            143
    in Drawn Butter                                           92
    Pickled                                                  136

  Biscuit, Baking Powder                                     180
    Little Cream                                             180
    Tea                                                      158

  Blackberry Roly-Poly                                       112

  Blueberry Pie                                               99
    Steamed Pudding                                           96
    Tea Cake                                                 184

  Bluefish √† la Creole                                        66

  Bouillon, Chicken                                           54
    Clam                                                      57
    Tomato                                                32, 97

  Brandy Snaps                                               179
    Sauce                                                    172

  Bread, Biscuit Tea                                         158
    Corn, Thin                                                95
    Croutons                                                  87
    Crusts                                                    44
    Graham                                                   164
    Rings, Imperial                                          100
    Sandwiches (Nut Bread)                                   152
    Sticks                                               15, 150

  Broth, Standard                                             32

  Brussels Sprouts                                            34


  Cabbage, Cream Cold Slaw                                   168
    New Salad                                                102
    Peggy's Sour                                              58
    Relish                                                20, 63
    Salad                                                     36
    Scalloped                                                140

  Cakes, Anise Seed Wafers                                    27
    Apple Cake                                                37
    Bride's Cake                                             175
    Chocolate Jumbles                                         42
    Chocolate Layer                                          177
    Chocolate Nut                                             18
    Chocolate, Rich                                          106
    Cocoanut                                                  56
    Cocoanut Cubes                                            18
    Coffee Cake, German                                      182
    Corn Starch Loaf                                          68
    Fruit Cake, Twelve Pound                                 175
    Griddle (Sour Milk)                                      182
    Marble                                                    64
    New England Election                                     176
    Nut and Raisin                                            92
    Peach, with Sweetened Cream                              132
    Raisin Cakelets                                          178
    Seed Cakes                                               177
    Spanish Layer                                             74
    Strawberry Shortcake                                      59
    Sultana                                                  118
    Tea Cake, Blueberry                                      184
    Twelve Pound Fruit                                       175
    Valentine Cakes                                          177
    White Nut                                                102

  Cake Frostings (see Frostings)

  Canap√©s, Cheese                                             81
    Nova Scotia                                              108
    Nut and Olive                                            142
    Shrimp Cocktail                                          134
    Smoked Sturgeon                                           57
    Tomato                                                   119

  Caramel Frosting with Nuts                                  93

  Carrot, Cream of                                           166

  Carrots in Cream Sauce                                      72

  Cauliflower √† la B√©chamel                                  111
    Salad                                                    132
    with Cheese Sauce                                    95, 132

  Celery, Creamed                                        29, 151
    Salads (See under Heading Salad)

  Cheese, Balls                                      52, 99, 114
    Butter Thins                                              97
    Canap√©                                                    81
    Cottage                                                  124
    Fingers                                                  141
    and Pimento Salad                                         26
    Sauce                                                     96
    Souffl√©                                                   58

  Cherry, Duff                                                88
    Pie                                                       80
    Punch                                                     83
    Roly-Poly                                                 85
    Sauce                                                     86

  Chicken Bouillon Chantilly                                  54
    Broiled                                                  110
    Consomm√© (See under Heading Consomm√©)
    Dumplings                                                 47
    Fricassee                                                 54
    Fried                                               131, 137
    Pressed                                                  104
    Stewed                                                    47
    Stew with Tea Biscuits                                   157

  Chili Sauce                                                 98

  Chive Sauce (See under Heading Sauce)

  Chocolate Cake (See under Cakes)
    Hot Sauce (Ice Cream)                                     18

  Chowder, Corn                                               25

  Clam, Bouillon                                              57
    and Tomato Consomm√©                                      142

  Cocktail, Grape Fruit                                       32
    Oyster                                               49, 169
    Shrimp                                                   134

  Cocoanut Cake                                               56
    Cubes                                                     18

  Cod, Boiled Fresh                                          135
    Fish Balls                                               186

  Coffee, Boiled                                              30
    Cake, German                                             182
    Caf√© au Lait (Iced)                                       99
    Iced                                                      93
    Noir                                                      21

  Consomm√©, Chicken (Cold)                                    90
    Chicken, with Macaroni Rings and Tomatoes                 35
    Chicken, with Poached Egg Yolks                           84
    Clam and Tomato                                          142
    Clear                                                    149
    Duchess                                                   15
    with Barley                                              173
    with Egg Balls                                            19
    Princess                                                  78
    Printaniere                                              100
    with Rice Balls                                          149
    au Riz                                                   113
    with Vegetables                                           94

  Cookies                                               178, 179

  Corn, Bread, Thin                                           95
    Chowder                                                   25
    Fritters                                             63, 132
    Green, Pudding                                           105
    Stewed Dried                                              48
    Stewed with Tomatoes                                     129
    Sweet, Boiled                                            117
    Sweet, New England Style                                 154

  Corned Beef, with Vegetables                                73

  Cottage Cheese                                             124
    Peach Pudding                                            115
    Pudding, Steamed                                          24

  Cottolene, How to Use                                     6, 7
    What It Is                                                 5

  Crab Meat                                                   15

  Cranberry Jelly                                            154
    Tarts                                                    174

  Cream Biscuit                                              180
    Dressing                                             50, 168
    Fruit Rolls                                              180
    Gravy                                                    131
    Salad Dressing                                           105
    Sauce                                               151, 155

  Croquettes, Sweet Potato                                    52

  Croutons                                                44, 87

  Crullers                                                   185

  Cucumber Baskets                                           117

  Culinary Hints                                              12

  Currant Jelly Sauce                                         36
    Pie                                                       83
    Pudding, Steamed                                          46

  Custard Pie                                                 72


  Dandelion, Greens                                           76
    Salad                                                     73

  Desserts (See under Heading Fruits)

  Doughnuts                                                  184

  Drawn Butter Sauce                                     92, 156

  Dressing, Cream                                        50, 168
    French                                           79, 83, 172
    Mayonnaise                                                79
    Relish                                                    64
    Salad (Boiled)                                            98
    Salad (Cream)                                            105

  Duck, Roast (with stuffing)                                170

  Dumplings, Apricot                                         161
    Chicken                                                   47
    Peach                                                    129


  Egg Balls                                                   19
    Sauce                                                95, 135
    and Watercress Salad                                      48

  Egg Plant, Fried                                           140
    Saut√© with Fine Herbs                                     41
    Stuffed                                                  163

  Endive, Celery and Green Pepper Salad                       17
    Dressed                                                  129
    French                                                    34


  Fig Pudding                                                165

  Figs in Sherry Jelly                                        92

  Fish, Bass, Black, Baked                                    94
    Bass, Sea, Breaded                                        19
    Blue, √† la Creole                                         66
    Cod, Boiled, Fresh                                       135
    Codfish Balls                                            186
    Finnan Haddie, Broiled                                    58
    Halibut, Baked                                            62
    Halibut, Boiled (Cold)                                   116
    Lake Trout, in Paper Bag                                  33
    Perch, Fried                                              84
    Sauce, a l'Italienne                                      33
    Sauce, Tartare                                            84
    White, Planked                                            49

  French Dressing                                    79, 83, 172

  French Fried Potatoes                                      117

  Fricassee of Chicken                                        54
    Tomato                                                    50

  Fritter, Banana                                            126
    Corn                                                 63, 132
    Batter (Egg Plant)                                       140
    Parsnip                                                  167
    Pineapple                                                 45

  Frostings, Boiled                                           56
    Caramel with Nuts                                         93
    Maple                                                    103
    Milk                                                     176

  Fruits, Ambrosia                                            27
    Apples (See under Heading Apples)
    Apricots, Frozen                                         117
    Cantaloupe √† la Mode                                     113
    Crab Apples, Spiced                                      147
    Cranberry Jelly                                          154
    Figs in Sherry Jelly                                      92
    Grape Fruit Cocktail                                      32
    Peaches (Sliced)                                         120
    Pineapple Fritters                                        45
    Raspberry Whip                                           102
    Rhubarb, Stewed                                           64
    Rhubarb Tarts                                             52
    Strawberries, Frozen                                  67, 74
    Watermelon with Sherry Sauce                             100


  Ginger Cakes, Plain                                        179

  Goose, Roast                                                16

  Graham Bread and Sandwiches                                164
    Muffins                                                  181
    Plum Pudding                                             148
    Pudding, Steamed                                          61

  Grandma's Bread Stuffing                                   154

  Grape Fruit Cocktails                                       32
    Salad                                                     52

  Gravy, Cream                                               131
    Brown                                                    146

  Griddle Cakes                                              182

  Guinea Fowl, Roast                                          40


  Halibut, Baked                                              62
    Boiled (Cold)                                            116

  Ham, Baked                                                  51

  Hamburg Roast                                               81

  Hard Sauce                                                 161

  Hints, Culinary                                         11, 12

  Horse-Radish Sauce                                     51, 120


  Ices, Orange                                                42
    Raspberry                                                113

  Ice Cream, Peach                                      106, 109
    Sauce, (Hot Chocolate)                                    18
    Vanilla                                                   17

  Imperial Rings                                             100
    Sticks                                                    15

  Introductory                                              3, 4


  Lake Trout in Paper Bag                                     33

  Lamb, Breast of, Stuffed and Roasted                        35
    Chops, Breaded                                            78
    Shoulder of, Roast                                        87
    Stuffing                                                  36

  Lemon Pie                                                   20
    Sauce                                                     37

  Lettuce, Head, Dressed                                 41, 111
    Cream of                                                 104
    Garden Cress and Onion Salad                             120
    with Cream Dressing                                       85
    Peppergrass and Onion Salad                              109
    Radish and Onion Salad                                   123

  Liver, Calf's, Braised                                      71

  Loaf Cake, Corn Starch                                      68


  Macaroni with Tomato Sauce                                  23

  Ma√Ætre D'H√¥tel Butter                                      186

  Marble Cake                                                 64

  Mayonnaise Dressing                                         79

  Measure, How to                                             10

  Meats, Beef (See under Heading Beef)
    Calf's Liver Braised                                      71
    Ham, Baked                                                51
    Hamburg Roast                                             81
    Hearts Stuffed with Vegetables                           101
    Lamb (See under Heading Lamb)
    Mutton Chops, Breaded                                     60
    Mutton, Boiled Leg                                       162
    Ox Joints en Casserole                                    25
    Pork (See under Heading Pork)
    Poultry (See Poultry)
    Sausage, Summer (Appetizer)                              125
    Steak, Flank, Stuffed and Braised                         75
    Tongue, Braised Beef                                      29
    Tongue, Boiled                                            97
    Veal (See under Heading Veal)
    Venison, Roast                                           150

  Meringue, (Lemon Pie)                                       21

  Mint Sauce                                                  88

  Muffins, Corn                                              181
    Graham                                                   181
    Popovers                                                 181
    Wheat                                                    181

  Mushroom Sauce                                             167

  Mutton, Leg, Boiled                                        162
    Chops, Breaded                                            60


  Noodle Soup                                                 22

  Nut and Olive Canap√©                                       142
    and Prune Salad                                           55
    Bread Sandwiches                                         152
    Cakes                                            18, 92, 102


  Olive and Nut Canap√©s                                      142
    Sauce                                                    170

  Onion, Bermuda with Buttered Sauce                          29
    Cream of                                                 157
    Creamed                                                  155
    and Pepper Salad                                         127
    au Gratin                                                 17
    with Cream                                                48
    Parsley                                                  167

  Orange Ice                                                  42
    Sauce                                                    126

  Ox Joints en Casserole                                      25

  Oysters, Cocktail                                      49, 169
    Fried (in Batter)                                        185
    Fried (in Cracker Meal)                                  185
    on Half Shell                                             14
    Soup                                                     162


  Parsnip Fritters                                           167
    Mashed                                                    45
    Saut√©d in Butter                                          26

  Paste, Plain                                               124
    Rich                                                     127

  Pea, Cream of                                              122
    Green, and Carrots in Cream Sauce                         82
    Green                                                     79
    and Onions, French Style                                 109

  Peach Cake with Sweetened Cream                            132
    Cottage Pudding                                          115
    Duff                                                     141
    Dumplings                                                129
    Ice Cream                                           106, 109
    Pudding, steamed                                         136
    Sliced                                                   120

  Pear Salad                                                 115

  Perch, Fried                                                84

  Piccalilli                                                 143

  Pie, Apple                                                 124
    Blueberry                                                 99
    Cherry                                                    80
    Cranberry Tarts                                          174
    Currant                                                   83
    Custard                                                   72
    Lemon                                                     20
    Mock Cherry                                              144
    Mock Mince                                               127
    Plain Paste                                              124
    Pumpkin                                                  156
    Raisin                                                    50
    Rhubarb                                                   48
    Rich Paste                                               127
    Squash                                               39, 158

  Pigeon, Young, Stuffed and Braised                      69, 70

  Pineapple Fritters                                      45, 46

  Plum Pudding                                               172
    Pudding, Graham                                          148
    Pudding, Yankee                                           30

  Popovers                                                   181

  Pork, Roast                                                173
    Shoulder of, Roast                                        38
    Tenderloin, Lyonnaise                                    160

  Potato, Aurora                                              63
    Baked                                                    140
    Balls                                                    123
    Boiled                                                   135
    Browned                                                  167
    Carlsbad                                                 108
    Chateau                                                   67
    Erin                                                      39
    Franconia                                                147
    French Fried                                             117
    Fried Whole                                               61
    on Half Shell                                             58
    √† l'Italienne                                            114
    Lattice                                                  105
    New, Creamed                                             120
    New, with Chive Sauce                                     78
    New, with New Peas                                        88
    Norwegian                                                 20
    Parsley                                              95, 125
    Puff                                                     101
    Roast, New                                                82
    Roses                                                    111
    Salad                                                     98
    Saratoga Chips                                            91
    Scalloped                                                160
    Shredded                                                  85
    Souffl√©                                                   41
    Soup                                                 38, 134
    Stuffed                                                  129

  Potatoes, Sweet, Baked                                     174
    Browned                                                  138
    Croquettes                                                52
    Glazed                                                   171
    Mashed                                                   151
    Southern Style                                            36

  Poultry, Chicken (See under Heading Chicken)
    Duck, Roast                                              170
    Goose, Roast                                              16
    Guinea Fowl, Roast                                        40
    Pigeon, Young (Stuffed and Braised)                       69
    Turkey, Roast                                            153

  Prune and Nut Salad                                         55

  Pudding, Apricot Dumplings                                 161
    Blackberry, Roly-Poly                                    112
    Blueberry, Steamed                                        96
    Cherry Duff                                               88
    Cherry Roly-Poly                                          85
    Cottage Pudding, Steamed                                  24
    Currant, Steamed                                          46
    Fig                                                      165
    Graham, Steamed                                           61
    Green Corn                                               105
    Peach (See under Heading Peach)
    Plum (See under heading Plum)
    Raspberry Whip                                           102
    Rice, Eggless                                             34
    Rice, with Pineapple, Frozen                             152
    Steamed Snow Balls                                       168
    Thanksgiving                                             155

  Pumpkin Pie                                                156

  Punch, Cherry                                               83


  Raisin Cakelets                                            178
    and Nut Cake                                              92
    Pie                                                       50

  Raspberry Ice                                              113
    Whip                                                     102

  Relish, Cabbage                                         20, 63
    Dressing                                                  64

  Rhubarb Pie                                                 48
    Sauce                                                     41
    Stewed                                                    64
    Tarts                                                     52

  Rice, Balls                                                 28
    Boiled                                                    26
    Cream of                                                  75
    Pudding, Eggless                                          34
    au Gratin                                                 71
    Frozen, with Pineapple                                   152
    Savory                                                   163
    Spanish                                                   45

  Rich Paste                                                 127

  Rolls, Cinnamon                                            183
    Cream Fruit                                              180
    Salad                                                    183

  Romaine with French Dressing                               140


  Salads, Alabama                                             50
    Apple and Date                                           174
    Asparagus                                                 72
    Bean (String)                                             91
    Bermuda                                                  161
    Cabbage                                                   36
    Cauliflower                                              132
    Celery                                                    39
    Cheese and Pimento                                        26
    Chiffonade                                                23
    Dandelion                                                 73
    Endive, Celery and Green Pepper                           17
    Escarolle                                                147
    Florida                                                   29
    Garden Cress with Orange                                  82
    Grape Fruit                                               52
    Hawaiian                                                 171
    June                                                      79
    Lettuce (See under Heading Lettuce)
    Lima Bean                                                164
    New Cabbage                                              102
    November                                                 158
    Pear                                                     115
    Pepper and Fruit                                         151
    Pepper and Onion                                         127
    Potato                                                    98
    Prune and Nut                                             55
    Red Cabbage, Celery and Onion                             46
    Rolls                                                    183
    Spinach                                                   70
    Stuffed Tomato                                           144
    Tomato                                                   105
    Tomato and Onion                                          96
    Watercress and Egg                                        48


  Salad Dressing (see Dressing)

  Sandwiches, Graham Bread                                   164
    Nut Bread                                                152

  Saratoga Chips                                              91

  Sauce, Apple, Spiced                                        38
    Apricot, Dried                                            46
    Banana                                                    24
    B√©chamel                                                  85
    Brandy                                                   172
    Brown Gravy                                              146
    Brown                                                     82
    Brown Sugar                                              148
    Caper                                                    163
    Cheese                                                    96
    Cherry                                                    86
    Chili                                                     98
    Chive                                                     79
    Chive Butter                                             165
    Cream Gravy                                              131
    Cream                                               151, 155
    Creamy                                                   112
    Creole                                                   122
    Currant Jelly                                             36
    Drawn Butter                                         92, 156
    Egg                                                  95, 135
    Foamy                                                96, 141
    Giblet                                                   154
    Golden                                                   102
    Hard                                                     161
    Hot Chocolate (Ice Cream)                                 18
    Hot Horse Radish                                          51
    Horse Radish (Whipped Cream)                             120
    Italienne                                                 33
    Lemon                                                     37
    Mint                                                      88
    Mushroom                                                 167
    Olive                                                    170
    Orange                                                   126
    Rhubarb                                                   41
    Sherry                                              100, 130
    Signora                                                   60
    Strawberry                                                74
    Sultana                                                   61
    Tartare                                                   84
    Tomato                                                    23
    Vanilla                                                  136
    Viennaise                                                110
    Vinaigrette                                              116
    Wine                                                     150

  Sausage, Summer (Appetizer)                                125

  Sherry Sauce                                          100, 130

  Short Cake, Strawberry                                      58

  Shrimp Cocktails                                           134

  Slaw, Hot                                                  155
    Kole                                                     138
    Cream, Cold                                              168

  Snow Balls, Steamed                                        168

  Souffl√©, Cheese                                             58
    Potato                                                    41

  Soups, Almond, Cream of                                    169
    Asparagus, Cream of                                       66
    Carrot, Cream of                                         166
    Chicken Bouillon, Chantilly                               54
    Clam Bouillon                                             57
    Consomm√©s (See under Heading Consomm√©s)
    Corn Chowder                                              25
    Lettuce, Cream of                                        104
    Noodle                                                    22
    Onion, Cream of                                          157
    Oyster                                                   162
    Pea, Cream of                                            122
    Potato                                                   134
    Potato, Scotch                                            38
    Rice, Cream of                                            75
    Spanish                                                   62
    Spinach, Cream of                                         69
    Spring                                                    44
    Tomato Bouillon                                       32, 97
    Tomato                                                    40
    Vegetable                                                137

  Spinach Cream of                                            69
    with Cream                                               123
    with Deviled Eggs                                         55
    Salad                                                     70

  Squash, Baked                                              144
    Pie                                                  39, 158
    Steamed                                             120, 163

  Steak, Flank, Stuffed and Braised                           75

  Stew, Chicken, with Tea Biscuits                           157

  Strawberries, Frozen                                    67, 74
    Sauce                                                     74
    Short Cake                                                59

  Stuffing, Bread, Grandma's                                 154
    Black Bass                                                94
    Fish                                                      34
    Hearts                                                   101
    Lamb                                                      36
    Pigeon                                                    70
    Potato and Nut                                            16
    Roast Duck                                               170

  Sturgeon, Canap√©, Smoked                                    57

  Succotash                                                  114

  Sultana Cake                                               118
    Sauce                                                     61

  Sweet Potatoes, Southern Style                              36
    Croquettes                                                52

  Swiss Chard, with Bacon                                     88


  Table of Measures                                           10
    Time, for Cooking                                         11

  Tartare Sauce                                               84

  Tarts, Cranberry                                           174
    Rhubarb                                                   62

  Tea Biscuit                                                158
    Iced                                                      80
    Spiced (Iced)                                            106

  Thanksgiving Pudding                                       155

  Timbales, Swedish                                           15

  Time-tables for Cooking, Baking, Frying, etc.               11

  Tomato, Baked                                              147
    Bouillon                                              32, 97
    Broiled                                              98, 126
    Canap√©                                                   119
    and Clam Consomm√©                                        142
    Fricassee                                                 50
    Salad (See Heading Salad)
    Sauce                                                     23
    Scalloped                                                135
    Soup                                                      40
    Stewed                                                    20
    Stuffed                                                  138

  Tongue, Boiled                                              97
    Braised Beef                                              29

  Turkey, Roast                                              153

  Turnips in Cream Sauce                                     129


  Valentine Cake                                             177

  Vanilla Ice Cream                                           17
    Sauce                                                    136

  Veal Breast of, Roasted                                     45
    Loaf                                                 91, 119
    Pot Pie with Baked Dumplings                             143
    Shoulder, Braised                                        122
    Spanish Style                                            128

  Vegetables, Asparagus                                   70, 85
    Beans (See Heading Beans)
    Beets (See Heading Beets)
    Brussels Sprouts                                          34
    Cabbage (See under Heading Cabbage)
    Carrots and Turnips in Cream Sauce                        72
    Cauliflower (Cheese Sauce)                                95
    Cauliflower √† la B√©chamel                                111
    Celery, Creamed                                      29, 151
    Corn (See under Heading Corn)
    Cucumber Baskets                                         117
    Dandelion Greens                                          76
    Egg Plant (See under Heading Egg Plant)
    Endive                                               34, 129
    Garden Cress with Orange                                  82
    Lettuce with Cream Dressing                               85
    Lettuce, Dressed, Head                               41, 111
    Onions (See under Heading Onions)
    Parsnips, Mashed                                          45
    Parsnips, Saut√©d in Butter                                26
    Peas (See Heading Peas)
    Piccalilli                                               143
    Potatoes (See under Heading Potatoes)
    Rice (See under Heading Rice)
    Romaine with French Dressing                             140
    Slaw (See Cabbage)
    Soup                                                     137
    Spinach (See Spinach)
    Squash (See Squash)
    Succotash                                                114
    Swiss Chard, with Bacon                                   88
    Tomatoes (See under Heading Tomatoes)
    Turnips in Cream Sauce                                   129

  Venison, Roast                                             150


  Wafers, Anise Seed                                          27

  Waffles                                                    182

  Watermelon with Sherry Sauce                               100

  Wheat Muffins                                              181

  Whitefish, Planked                                          49


  Yankee Plum Pudding                                         30

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Varied spacing and hyphenation retained. This includes "shortcake" and
"short cake," "peppergrass" and "pepper grass," "grapefruit,"
"grape-fruit" and "grape fruit," etc.

Page 5, "properities" changed to "properties" (in shortening properties)

Page 78, "and" changed to "add" (add in crumbs)

Page 102, "1 cup" added to powdered sugar in recipe for Golden Sauce.
Original omitted the amount.

Page 104, "ICE" changed to "ICED" (SPICED ICE TEA)

Page 108, word "first" added to text (for the first two minutes)

Page 113, "canteloupe" changed to "cantaloupe" (of halves of
cantaloupe)

Page 150, "in" changed to "on" (roll on the)

Page 160, "reeipe" changed to "recipe" (recipe see Page 38)

Page 187, "Cr√©ole" changed to "Creole" to match text usage (Bluefish √†
la Creole)

Page 188, "Consumm√©" changed to "Consomm√©" (See under Heading Consomm√©)

Page 188, "Printani√©re" changed to "Printaniere" to match text usage
(Printaniere 100)

Page 189, "Canteloupe" changed to "Cantaloupe" (Cantaloupe √† la Mode
113)

Page 189, "Mint Sauce 88 " was moved from after "Measure, How to" to
after "Meringue"

Page 190, "Picallilli" changed to "Picalilli" (Picalilli 143)

Page 192, "Picallilli" changed to "Picalilli" (Picalilli 143)





End of Project Gutenberg's Fifty-Two Sunday Dinners, by Elizabeth O. Hiller

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY-TWO SUNDAY DINNERS ***

***** This file should be named 31534-8.txt or 31534-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/3/31534/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
