The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Taxonomic Study of the Middle American
Snake, Pituophis deppei, by William E. Duellman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Taxonomic Study of the Middle American Snake, Pituophis deppei

Author: William E. Duellman

Release Date: March 9, 2010 [EBook #31570]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIDDLE AMERICAN SNAKE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Simon Gardner, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







Transcriber's Notes

Italic typeface is indicated by _underscores_. Bold typeface is
indicated by =equals=.

"Rijkmuseum van Natuurlijke Histoire" changed to "Rijksmuseum van
Natuurlijke Historie" (Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie, Leiden)

corrected typo period for comma (Erpétologie générale, vol. 7, p. 268)

"Chipas" changed to "Chiapas" (Guatemalan highlands and probably
highlands of Chiapas.)

The style of the majority of citations in this paper are of the form
"(year: page)". A small number of citations been ammended to include the
space following the colon.

       *       *       *       *       *


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Vol. 10, No. 10, pp. 599-610, 1 pl., 1 fig.
May 2, 1960




                      A Taxonomic Study
                of the Middle American Snake,
                      Pituophis deppei


                            BY

                    WILLIAM E. DUELLMAN


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1960


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Robert W. Wilson


Volume 10, No. 10, pp. 599-610, 1 pl., 1 fig.
Published May 2, 1960


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED IN
THE STATE PRINTING PLANT
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1960

28-2493


PLATE 45

[Illustration: FIG. 1. _Pituophis deppei deppei_ from Cumbres de
Acultzingo, Veracruz, UMMZ 114596. Approx. 1/2 natural size.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. _Pituophis lineaticollis lineaticollis_ from Dos
Aguas, Michoacán, UMMZ 119567. Approx. 1/3 natural size.]




A Taxonomic Study of the Middle American Snake, Pituophis deppei

BY

WILLIAM E. DUELLMAN


INTRODUCTION

As a part of a study of the herpetofauna of the Mexican state of
Michoacán an attempt was made to ascertain the interspecific and
intraspecific relationships of the various populations of _Pituophis_
there. Field work in Michoacán revealed that two supposed subspecies of
_Pituophis deppei_ were sympatric. This discovery led to the examination
of all available (124) museum specimens of these snakes.

I am grateful to the following persons who permitted me to examine
specimens in their care: Charles M. Bogert, American Museum of Natural
History (AMNH); Doris M. Cochran, United States National Museum (USNM);
Norman Hartweg, University of Michigan Museum of Zoology (UMMZ); Robert
F. Inger, Chicago Natural History Museum (CNHM); Arthur Loveridge,
Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ); Hobart M. Smith, University of
Illinois Museum of Natural History (UIMNH); and Edward H. Taylor, E. H.
Taylor--H. M. Smith collection (EHT-HMS). Specimens in the accounts of
the species are listed after the abbreviations of the institutions given
in parentheses above.


HISTORICAL REVIEW

Duméril (1853: 453) described _Elaphis deppei_ from a specimen in the
Leiden Museum from "Mexico." This specimen, according to the type
description, has 233 ventrals and 67 caudals. In 1863 Jan described
_Pituophis deppei_ var. _pholidostictus_, also with "Mexico" as the type
locality. Subsequent authors (see synonymy of _P. deppei deppei_ in
Stull, 1940: 25) have treated _pholidostictus_ as a synonym of _deppei_.
Smith and Taylor (1950: 334) restricted the type localities of _deppei_
and _pholidostictus_ to San Juan Teotihuacán, México. Cope (1860: 369)
described _Arizona jani_ on the basis of a specimen in the United States
National Museum from Buena Vista, Coahuila. Stull (1932: 2, 1940: 42),
Smith (1944: 145) and Smith and Taylor (1945: 107) considered _jani_ as
a northern subspecies of _Pituophis deppei_. _Arizona lineaticollis_
was described by Cope (1861: 300); the type, which originally was in
the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia and is now lost, was
said to have come from Jalapa, Veracruz. This locality probably is in
error. Smith (1943: 460) placed _lineaticollis_ as a southern subspecies
of _deppei_. Schmidt and Shannon (1947: 79) described _Pituophis deppei
brevilineata_ on the basis of five specimens from Tancítaro, Michoacán,
and Stuart (1954: 172) described _Pituophis deppei gibsoni_ from seven
specimens from Departamento Chimaltenango, Guatemala. Thus, at present
five subspecies of _Pituophis deppei_ are recognized.


CHARACTERS STUDIED

Snakes currently assigned to _Pituophis deppei_ differ from other
members of the genus by possessing two instead of four prefrontal
plates. The subspecies of _P. deppei_ have been defined on characters of
coloration and scutellation.

_Scutellation._--The only scale characters utilized in the present study
are the numbers of ventrals and caudals. The number of ventrals varies
in the total sample from 210 to 246 (Table 1); usually the variation in
one locality is no more than 15. Number of caudals varies from 52 to 72.
There is slight sexual dimorphism in the number of ventrals and somewhat
greater differences in the number of caudals.

TABLE 1.--Variation in the Numbers of Ventrals and Caudals in Four
Subspecies of Pituophis.

==============================+====================+==================
SUBSPECIES                    |    Ventrals       |       Caudals
                              +---------+---------+---------+---------
                              | Range   |  Mean   |   Range |   Mean
------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------
_deppei deppei_               |         |         |         |
  34 ♂♂                       | 210-231 |   220.4 |   53-69 |   61.5
  16 ♀♀                       | 209-232 |   218.2 |   52-61 |   57.2
                              |         |         |         |
_deppei jani_                 |         |         |         |
  12 ♂♂                       | 215-235 |   225.1 |   56-68 |   62.6
   3 ♀♀                       | 228-231 |   229.0 |   52-60 |   56.0
                              |         |         |         |
_lineaticollis lineaticollis_ |         |         |         |
  13 ♂♂                       | 231-258 |   239.5 |   54-72 |   64.9
   9 ♀♀                       | 229-249 |   241.3 |   55-68 |   60.6
                              |         |         |         |
_lineaticollis gibsoni_       |         |         |         |
   2 ♂♂                       |     234 |   234.0 |   61-65 |   63.0
   4 ♀♀                       | 241-246 |   243.7 |   57-63 |   59.0
------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------



_Coloration._--The dorsal ground color is tan or straw; the dorsal
pattern consists basically of dark middorsal blotches and dark lateral
intercalary spots. Number of blotches, color of blotches posteriorly,
width of pale interspaces between anterior blotches, and color of
lateral intercalary spots vary considerably geographically. In some
populations (_lineaticollis_ and _gibsoni_) the anterior blotches are
divided medially forming either a pair of dark stripes on the anterior
part of the body or a series of paired spots. Details of coloration are
described in the following accounts.


ACCOUNTS OF THE SPECIES AND SUBSPECIES

[Illustration: FIG. 1. México and Guatemala showing the distribution of
the subspecies of _Pituophis deppei_ and _P. lineaticollis_.]

Study of _Pituophis deppei_ (_auctorum_) revealed the presence of
sympatric populations of two distinct species of _Pituophis_ differing
from each other in scutellation and coloration. The nomenclature
resulting from the required rearrangement necessitates the recognition
of 1) _deppei_ as a species, 2) _jani_ as a subspecies of _deppei_, 3)
_lineaticollis_ (with _brevilineata_ as a synonym) as a species distinct
from _deppei_, and 4) _gibsoni_ as a subspecies of _lineaticollis_.
Known geographic distributions of these named taxa are shown in Figure
1.


=Pituophis deppei deppei= Duméril

     _Elaphis deppei_ Duméril, Mem. Acad. Inst. France, vol. 23, p. 453,
     1853; Duméril and Bibron, Erpétologie générale, vol. 7, p. 268,
     February 25, 1854.

     _Pituophis deppei_, Jan, Elenco sistematico degli ofidi, p. 59,
     1863; Günther, Biologia Centrali-Americana, Reptilia, p. 124,
     February, 1894.

     _Elaphis pleurostictus_ Duméril, Mem. Acad. Inst. France, vol. 23,
     p. 453, 1853 [Type.--Museum d'Histoire Naturelle Paris, No. 6616;
     type locality--"Monte Video" (restricted to San Juan Teotihuacán,
     México, by Smith and Taylor, 1950: 334)].

     _Pituophis pleurostictus_, Jan, Elenco sistematico degli ofidi, p.
     59, 1863.

     _Pituophis deppei_, var. _pholidostictus_ Jan, Elenco sistematico
     degli ofidi, p. 59, 1863 [Type.--Zoologisches Museum Berlin, No.
     1738; type locality.--"Mexico" (restricted to San Juan Teotihuacán,
     México, by Smith and Taylor, 1950: 334)].

     _Pituophis deppei deppei_, Stull, Occas. Papers Mus. Zool. Univ.
     Michigan, no. 250, p. 1, October 12, 1932; Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus.
     175, p. 25, April 23, 1940; Smith and Taylor, U. S. Natl. Mus., no.
     187, p. 107, 1945.

_Type._--Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Histoire, Leiden, No. ???, obtained
by Ferdinand Deppe. The type locality was originally given as "Mexico";
this was restricted to San Juan Teotihuacán, state of México, by Smith
and Taylor (1950: 334).

_Diagnosis._--This subspecies is characterized by the presence of solid
body-blotches and lateral intercalary spots, dorsal interspaces less
than five scales in length, and the absence of paired stripes or rows of
blotches, on the anterior part of the body. There are 209 to 232
ventrals and 52 to 62 caudals. The body-blotches number 27 to 49. In
adults the anterior and posterior body-blotches are black; the lateral
intercalary spots are solid black. In many individuals black dashes
connect the adjacent corners of the dorsal body-blotches (Pl. 45, Fig.
1). In juveniles the anterior, dorsal body-blotches are black, whereas
those at the midbody and posteriorly are brown.

_Variation._--Geographically, scutellation varies only slightly.
Comparison of specimens from the northern part of the Mexican Plateau
(Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Durango--5 specimens), the central part of the
plateau (Aguascalientes, San Luis Potosí, and Zacatecas--13 specimens),
the southern part of the plateau (Guanajuato, Jalisco, México, and
Michoacán--18 specimens), and Puebla and southern Veracruz (12
specimens) shows the average number of ventrals for these samples to be,
respectively, 221.6, 216.7, 221.3, and 220.0. The average number of
dorsal body-blotches for the same samples are, respectively, 36.6,
37.7, 38.4, and 34.6. Only in the southernmost sample is there a
noticeable difference in the number of blotches.

The specimen from Párajo Verde, Veracruz, was considered to be an
intergrade between _P. deppei_ and _P. lineaticollis_ by Smith (1943:
461), who stated that, although the snake had 231 ventrals and dark
lateral streaks as does _deppei_, it had light-centered dorsal blotches
and stripes on the neck as does _lineaticollis_. This specimen (USNM
110892) has a high number of ventrals for _deppei_; one from Jalisco has
232, and one each from Guanajuato and Veracruz have 229. The blotches
posteriorly are lighter than those anteriorly and are slightly lighter
in the center than at the periphery. Two anterior blotches are divided
medially and narrowly connected by black streaks. Although these are
somewhat suggestive of the pattern of _lineaticollis_, they are more
nearly like that of _deppei_. Four other specimens from the same area
are typically _deppei_. There is some doubt as to the actual provenance
of the snake stated to have come from Párajo Verde, for, according to
Smith (1943: 460), the snake had been tied to a truck and dragged
halfway down the slopes of the Cumbres de Acultzingo, where he found it.
He surmised that it probably was dragged no farther than the settlement,
Párajo Verde, at the Cumbres de Acultzingo.

Fugler and Webb (1956: 171) commented on the uniformly brown dorsum of a
specimen (KU 39564) from 16 miles east and 18 miles north of Ocampo,
Coahuila. It has a higher number of ventrals (242) and caudals (88) than
is known for deppei. It is, without a doubt, a _Pituophis_. It is not
_Pituophis catenifer_, as attested to by the presence of only two
prefrontals. The high number of ventrals and caudals, together with the
uniform dark brown dorsum, provide a combination of characters
indicating that this specimen may represent an undescribed species in
the _deppei_ group of _Pituophis_.

_Distribution._--Southern Chihuahua and southern Coahuila southward on
the western and central parts of the Mexican Plateau to the Valley of
México and to southeastern Puebla and adjacent Veracruz.

_Specimens examined._--Total of 63, as follows: _Aguascalientes_: 16 km.
N of Aguascalientes, UIMNH 27149; 17 km. E of Aguascalientes, UIMNH
36222; 5 km. SW of Aguascalientes, KU 29495; Cavillito, UIMNH 28134; 11
km. N of Rincon de Romos, UIMNH 40359-60; 2 km. N of San Francisco de
los Romos, UIMNH 27569. _Chihuahua_: USNM 8321 (2 specimens);
Semachique, CNHM 11825. _Coahuila_: Castanuelas, MCZ 407. _Distrito
Federal_: Lago Xochimilco, UIMNH 18709; Pedregal, UMMZ 99790. _Durango_:
Coyotes, CNHM 1497; Hacienda Magdalena, USNM 46365; Llano Grande, UMMZ
113634. _Guanajuato_: USNM 16442; Acambaro, KU 45003; Irapuato, UIMNH
35055. _Jalisco_: Atemajac, USNM 46385; Guadalajara, USNM 24969; 5 km.
SE of Guadalajara, KU 29508; Jamay, AMNH 19848-9, 19851-2; 3 km. WNW of
Lagos de Moreno, KU 27727; 5 km. NW of Sayula, UMMZ 101933. _México_:
Atzocozlco, AMNH 19850; Chalco, USNM 110889; San Juan Teotihuacán,
EHT-HMS 5378, 5383, MCZ 16051. _Michoacán_: 6 km. E of Carapan, AMNH
69940; 3 km. W of Carapan, UMMZ 114598; 14 km. W of Morelia, UMMZ
104969; Tacambaro, USNM 46557; Tacícuaro, USNM 110888; 11 km. W of
Zacapu, UMMZ 104968. _Puebla_: Alseseca, UIMNH 36221; Atlixco, USNM
46433; Puebla, AMNH 19856; 30 km. N of Puebla, USNM 110887;
Tecamachalco, UMMZ 88688; 16 km. SSE of Tecamachalco, UMMZ 114597;
Tehuacan, UMMZ 88687; 22 km. N of Tehuacan, EHT-HMS 5377. _San Luis
Potosí_: USNM 46554; 26 km. SW of San Luis Potosí, UIMNH 28133.
_Veracruz_: 3 km. W of Acultzingo, KU 23978; Cumbres de Acultzingo,
UIMNH 36224, 36226, UMMZ 114596; Párajo Verde, USNM 110892; questionably
from Potrero Viejo, UMMZ 89358-9. _Zacatecas_: 16 km. E of Somberete,
UIMNH 27147; 1 km. SW of Tiburcio, KU 33599; 3 km. ESE of Troncoso, KU
29494; 10 km. W of Villa de Arriaga (San Luis Potosí), UIMNH 27151; 24
km. NW of Zacatecas, UIMNH 6393; 13 km. SE of Zacatecas, UIMNH 27148; 26
km. SE of Zacatecas, UIMNH 27568.


=Pituophis deppei jani= Cope

     _Arizona jani_ Cope, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 369,
     1860.

     _Pituophis deppei jani_, Stull, Occas. Papers Mus. Zool. Univ.
     Michigan, no. 250, p. 2, October 12, 1932, Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus.,
     no. 175, p. 42, April 23, 1940; Smith, Zool. Ser. Field Mus. Nat.
     Hist., vol. 29, p. 145, February 29, 1944; Smith and Taylor, Bull.
     U. S. Natl. Mus., no. 187, p. 107, 1940.

_Type._--United States National Museum, No. 1522, from Buena Vista,
Coahuila, obtained by Lieutenant Darius N. Couch.

_Diagnosis._--This subspecies is characterized by solid body-blotches
that are black anteriorly and brown posteriorly, anterior dorsal
interspaces six or more scales in length, and the absence of dark
stripes or rows of spots on the anterior part of the body. There are 215
to 235 ventrals, 52 to 68 caudals, and 21 to 31 dorsal body-blotches.
The position of the lateral intercalary spots and lateral streaks are
the same as in _deppei deppei_.

_Variation._--Throughout the range of this subspecies the posterior
body-blotches are brown and noticeably lighter than the anterior ones.
Juveniles are colored like adults. Specimens from the northern part of
the range (Nuevo León and Tamaulipas) have 21 to 28 (average 24.0)
dorsal body-blotches and 7 to 11 (average 8.9) scales in the interspace
between the first and second dorsal body-blotches, as compared with
specimens from the southern part of the range (Hidalgo, Queretaro, and
San Luis Potosí), which have 24 to 31 (average 27.7) dorsal
body-blotches and 6 to 10 (average 7.8) scales in the first interspace.
Likewise, there is a difference in the number of ventrals between the
northern and southern samples; those from the north have an average of
228.8 ventrals, and those from the south have 222.0. In all of these
characters the southern sample shows trends towards the southern
subspecies, _deppei_, which has fewer ventrals, fewer scales in the
first interspace, and more dorsal body-blotches.

_Distribution._--Eastern part of the Mexican Plateau and lower leeward
slopes of the Sierra Madre Oriental from Hidalgo and Queretaro northward
to southeastern Coahuila.

_Specimens examined._--Total of 28, as follows: _Coahuila_: Buena Vista,
USNM 1522; 50 km. W of La Rosa, EHT-HMS 5374. _Hidalgo_: Ixmiquilpan,
USNM 110890-1; 24 km. S of Ixmiquilpan, EHT-HMS 5373; Jacala, UMMZ
80937; 35 km. E of Pachuca, UMMZ 99552; 16 km. E of Tulancingo, KU
40357. _Nuevo León_: Ojo de Agua near Galeana, CNHM 33564-5.
_Queretaro_: Cadereyta, UMMZ 99791-3. _San Luis Potosí_: Charcas, UMMZ
77256-8; San Diego, UMMZ 77254-5; 24 km. NE of San Luis Potosí, UIMNH
18711; 30 km. NE of San Luis Potosí, UIMNH 27150, 28135. _Tamaulipas_:
Miquihuana, MCZ 19544-50.


=Pituophis lineaticollis lineaticollis= Cope, new combination

     _Arizona lineaticollis_ Cope, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia,
     p. 300, 1861.

     _Pituophis lineaticollis_, Stull, Occas. Papers Mus. Zool. Univ.
     Michigan, no. 250, p. 2, October 12, 1932, Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus.,
     no. 175, p. 47, April 23, 1940.

     _Pituophis deppei lineaticollis_, Smith, Proc. U. S. Natl. Mus.,
     vol. 93, p. 460, 1943; Smith and Taylor, Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus.,
     no. 187, p. 108, 1945.

     _Pituophis deppei brevilineata_ Schmidt and Shannon,
     Fieldiana-Zool., vol. 31, p. 79, February 20, 1947.

_Type._--No type specimen is known. Cope (1861: 300 and 1887: 72) stated
that the specimen was from the southern Mexican Plateau and that it was
collected by Carlos Sartorius. Smith and Taylor (1945: 108 and 1950:
348) gave the type locality as Jalapa, Veracruz. Although this locality
was the source of many specimens sent to the United States by Sartorius,
it is not within the known range of _lineaticollis_, and therefore
cannot appropriately be thought of as the type locality. In the absence
of a type specimen and a justifiable type locality, I hereby designate
as a neotype, University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, No. 114668. This
specimen was collected 24 kilometers northwest of Ciudad Oaxaca, Oaxaca,
on February 29, 1956, by William E. Duellman. It is an adult female
having 229 ventrals, 67 caudals, and long black neck-stripes followed
posteriorly by 23 light-centered dorsal body-blotches.

_Diagnosis._--This subspecies is characterized by the presence of
continuous dark paravertebral stripes on the anterior part of the body,
and light-centered dorsal body-blotches and lateral intercalary spots
(Pl. 45, Fig. 2). There are 229 to 258 ventrals, 54 to 72 caudals, and
23 to 45 dorsal body-blotches posterior to the neck-stripes. The young
are colored like the adults.

_Variation._--Specimens from the southern part of the range in Oaxaca
have 229 to 245 ventrals (average 238.3); to the north on the Mexican
Plateau in the state of Michoacán seven specimens have 231 to 243
(average 237.1) ventrals. In the relatively isolated mountain ranges of
the Sierra del Sur in Guerrero and the Sierra de Coalcomán in southern
Michoacán the ranges of variation and average numbers of ventrals are,
respectively, 234 to 258 (245.8) and 236 to 246 (242.2). The longest
neck-stripes are found in specimens from Oaxaca and Guerrero;
nevertheless, some specimens from the Mexican Plateau in Michoacán and
three of the four specimens from the Sierra de Coalcomán have
neck-stripes equally long. One specimen from 40 kilometers north of
Ciudad México and several from the vicinity of Tancítaro, Michoacán,
have rather shorter neck-stripes. One specimen from Dos Aguas,
Michoacán, has the neck-stripes partially fragmented into rows of spots
as in _gibsoni_.

On the basis of specimens from Tancítaro, Michoacán, Schmidt and Shannon
(1947: 79) described the subspecies _brevilineata_, which they diagnosed
as differing from _lineaticollis_ in having fewer ventrals and shorter
neck-stripes. The present data suggest that the characters used to
diagnose the subspecies are variable not only in Michoacán, but
throughout the range of the species. Consequently, _Pituophis (deppei)
brevilineata_ Schmidt and Shannon (1947) is placed in the synonymy of
_Pituophis lineaticollis lineaticollis_ Cope (1861).

_Distribution._--The southern part of the Mexican Plateau in the states
of Michoacán, México, and Morelos, the Sierra de Coalcomán in southern
Michoacán, and the Sierra del Sur in Guerrero and Oaxaca.

_Specimens examined._--Total of 25, as follows: _Guerrero_: Acahuizotla,
USNM 46537; Chilpancingo, CNHM 38356-9, UIMNH 35000, UMMZ 85724-5;
Omiltemi, USNM 46462. _México_: 40 km. N of Ciudad México, UIMNH 36223.
_Michoacán_: Acuaro de las Lleguas, UMMZ 112565; Dos Aguas, UMMZ 118786,
119567-8; 40 km. E of Morelia, UMMZ 101932; Tancítaro, CNHM 37126,
39069-72. _Morelos_: 1 km. W of Tepoztlán, UMMZ 101931; Tres Cumbres,
UIMNH 35001. _Oaxaca_: 25 km. N of El Soledad, UIMNH 6210; 24 km. NW of
Oaxaca, UMMZ 114668; San Pedro Quiechapa, USNM 110893.


=Pituophis lineaticollis gibsoni= Stuart, new combination

     _Pituophis deppei gibsoni_ Stuart, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     vol. 67, p. 172, August 5, 1954.

_Type._--University of Michigan Museum of Zoology No. 107060, obtained
by Colvin Gibson. Type locality: Yepocapa, Chimaltenango, Guatemala.

_Diagnosis._--This race is characterized by paired, elongated,
pale-centered, paravertebral spots on the anterior part of the body.
Posterior to the paired spots are 22 to 27 dorsal body-blotches; these
and the lateral intercalary spots have pale centers. There are 234 to
246 ventrals and 57 to 65 caudals.

_Variation._--The few specimens that are available from a small
geographic area do not permit a discussion of geographic variation at
this time. All of the specimens have the paired paravertebral spots and
blotches with light centers. In this respect the population of
_lineaticollis_ east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec is noticeably
different from the nominal subspecies in the Mexican highlands. Smith
and Taylor (1945: 108) listed a specimen from San Cristobal, Chiapas. I
have not seen this specimen and so do not know to which subspecies it
belongs. On geographical grounds it probably is _gibsoni_.

_Distribution._--Guatemalan highlands and probably highlands of Chiapas.
Aside from the specimens examined, two others are known--one from Volcán
Agua, Sacatepequez (Slevin, 1939: 400), and one from Dueñas,
Sacatepequez (Boulenger, 1894: 65); these localities are not shown in
figure 1.

_Specimens examined._--Eight, as follows: Guatemala: _Chimaltenango_:
Chichavac, CNHM 1927; Finca El Tesoro, 3 km. SE of Acatenango, UMMZ
107062-3; Finca Recreo, 4.5 km. SW of Yepocapa, UMMZ 107381; Río Los
Positos, 5.5 km. NE of Yepocapa, UMMZ 107061; Río Sobolopop, 8 km. W of
Patzún, UMMZ 107064; Yepocapa, UMMZ 107060. _El Quiche_: Nebaj, UMMZ
89202.




LITERATURE CITED


BOULENGER, G. A.

     1894. Catalogue of the snakes in the British Museum (Natural
     History). London, 2:xi + 382 pp., pls. 1-20.

COPE, E. D.

     1860. Descriptions of reptiles from tropical America and Asia.
     Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 1860:368-374.

     1861. Contributions to the ophiology of Lower California, Mexico,
     and Central America. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia,
     1861:292-306.

     1887. Catalogue of the batrachians and reptiles of Central America
     and Mexico. Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus., 32: 1-98.

DUMÉRIL, A. M. C.

     1853. Prodrome général de la classification des serpents. Mem.
     Acad. Sci. Inst. France, 23:399-536, 2 pls.

DUMÉRIL, A. M. C., and BIBRON, G.

     1854. Erpétologie générale, ou histoire naturelle des reptiles.
     Paris, 7 (pt. 1): xvi + 780 pp.

FUGLER, C. M., and WEBB, R. G.

     1956. Distributional notes on some reptiles and amphibians from
     southern and central Coahuila. Herpetologica, 12:167-171.

GÜNTHER, A.

     1885-1902. Biologia Centrali-Americana. Reptilia and Batrachia.
     London, xx + 326 pp., pls. 1-76.

JAN, G.

     1863. Elenco sistematico degli ofidi. Milan, 143 pp.

SCHMIDT, K. P., and SHANNON, F. A.

     1947. Notes on amphibians and reptiles of Michoacan, Mexico.
     Fieldiana-Zool., 31 (9):63-85.

SLEVIN, J. R.

     1939. Notes on a collection of reptiles and amphibians from
     Guatemala. I. Snakes. Proc. California Acad. Sci., 4th, ser., 23
     (26):393-414, pls. 37-38.

SMITH, H. M.

     1943. Summary of the collections of snakes and crocodilians made in
     Mexico under the Walter Rathbone Bacon Traveling Scholarship. Proc.
     U. S. Natl. Mus., 93:393-504.

     1944. Snakes of the Hoogstraal Expeditions to northern Mexico.
     Zool. Ser. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., 29 (8):135-152.

SMITH, H. M., and TAYLOR, E. H.

     1945. An annotated checklist and key to the snakes of Mexico. Bull.
     U. S. Natl. Mus., 187: iv + 239 pp.

     1950. Type localities of Mexican reptiles and amphibians. Univ.
     Kansas Sci. Bull., 33 (8):313-380.

STUART, L. C.

     1954. Descriptions of some new amphibians and reptiles from
     Guatemala. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 67:159-178.

STULL, O. G.

     1932. An annotated list of the forms of the genus _Pituophis_.
     Occas. Papers Mus. Zool. Univ. Michigan, 250:1-5.

     1940. Variations and relationships in the snakes of the genus
     _Pituophis_. Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus., 175:vi + 225 pp.


_Transmitted February 2, 1960._

28-2493






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Taxonomic Study of the Middle
American Snake, Pituophis deppe, by William E. Duellman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIDDLE AMERICAN SNAKE ***

***** This file should be named 31570-0.txt or 31570-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/7/31570/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Simon Gardner, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
