The Project Gutenberg EBook of A New Subspecies of Slider Turtle
(Pseudemys scripta) from Coahuila, Mexico, by John M. Legler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A New Subspecies of Slider Turtle (Pseudemys scripta) from Coahuila, Mexico

Author: John M. Legler

Release Date: March 9, 2010 [EBook #31574]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLIDER TURTLE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
                      MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

           Volume 13, No. 3, pp. 73-84, pls. 9-12, 3 figs.
                           August 16, 1960


                  A New Subspecies of Slider Turtle
              (Pseudemys scripta) from Coahuila, México

                                  BY

                            JOHN M. LEGLER


                         UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                               LAWRENCE
                                 1960




     UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

         Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
                           Robert W. Wilson


           Volume 13, No. 3, pp. 73-84, pls. 9-12, 3 figs.
                      Published August 16, 1960


                         UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                           Lawrence, Kansas


                              PRINTED IN
                       THE STATE PRINTING PLANT
                            TOPEKA, KANSAS
                                 1960

                                28-3860




                  A New Subspecies of Slider Turtle
              (Pseudemys scripta) from Coahuila, México

                                  BY

                            JOHN M. LEGLER


In September, 1958, the author and two colleagues collected a large
series of _Pseudemys_ in small ponds and in a river in the basin of
Cuatro Ciénegas, Coahuila. The specimens prove to represent a
previously unrecognized subspecies of _Pseudemys scripta_. The
subspecies is named in honor of Edward Harrison Taylor who has
contributed more than any other person to our present knowledge of
the herpetofauna of México.


              =Pseudemys scripta taylori= new subspecies

                      (Pls. 9-12, Figures 1 & 2)

_Holotype._--Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist., No. 46952, adult female,
alcoholic; 16 km. S Cuatro Ciénegas, Coahuila, México; 6 September
1958; original number 1694 John M. Legler.

_Paratypes._--A total of 52 specimens as follows (numbers or series
of numbers marked with an asterisk are for specimens prepared as dry
shell with soft parts in alcohol): KU 46932-4*, 46949-51, 46953-67,
46969 (females), 46935*, 46936-48, 46968 (males), same data as
holotype, 6 to 8 September 1958; UU 3416 (male), same locality, 29 to
30 July 1959; KU 46971, 46973* (females), 46972 (male), 46970, 46974
(juveniles), 6 mi. W Cuatro Ciénegas, 3 to 6 September 1958; IU 43585,
43587-9 (females), 43586, 43590 (males), same locality, 11 July 1958;
CNHM 55655 (female), same locality, 22 August 1939; KU 46976 (female),
Río Chiquito, 10 km. S Cuatro Ciénegas, 9 September 1958; UU 3415
(female), 8.5 mi. SW Cuatro Ciénegas, 1 August 1959.

_Diagnosis._--A subspecies of _Pseudemys scripta_ most closely
resembling _P. s. elegans_, but differing from that subspecies in
having: 1) extensive _black_ plastral pattern, all parts of which are
interconnected, covering approximately half of plastron; 2) tendency
toward melanism, in large adults of both sexes, especially noticeable
on posterior part of plastron; 3) cutting edge of lower jaw coarsely
serrate; 4) tendency for femoral edges of plastron to be reflected
ventrally, especially in males; and, 5) pectoral scute longer than
gular.

_Description of holotype_ (measurements given in Table 1).--Carapace
oval in dorsal aspect, slightly narrowed behind, nearly straight
across anterior margin, bluntly serrate behind; shell deep, highly
arched in cross section; height of shell 53 per cent of width; surface
of shell having longitudinal striations; middorsal keel weakly
developed, scarcely discernible except on third central lamina;
lateral margin of carapace not at all reflected, posterolateral
margins flared outward; central laminae all broader than long, the
first urn-shaped.

    TABLE 1. MEASUREMENTS (IN MILLIMETERS) OF THE HOLOTYPE
    (46952) AND NINE ADULT, TOPOTYPIC PARATYPES OF PSEUDEMYS
    SCRIPTA TAYLORI NEW SUBSPECIES. HEIGHT WAS MEASURED IN A
    VERTICAL LINE FROM THE CENTER OF THE PLASTRON.

    KEY:
    A: Collection and Catalogue No.
    B: Sex
    C: Length of Carapace
    D: Width of Carapace
    E: Length of Plastron
    F: Width of Plastral Forelobe (Humeropectoral)
    G: Width of Plastral Hind Lobe (Mid-femoral)
    H: Height
    I: Width of Head

  =================================================================
       A     |    B     |  C  |  D  |  E  |  F  |  G  |  H  |  I
  -----------+----------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------
    KU 46948 |  [Male]  | 179 | 127 | 157 |  71 |  69 |  69 |  28
    KU 46941 |  [Male]  | 148 | 107 | 129 |  59 |  59 |  57 |  25
    KU 46968 |  [Male]  | 139 |  99 | 116 |  55 |  54 |  57 |  25
    KU 46937 |  [Male]  | 128 | 100 | 115 |  54 |  52 |  47 |  21
    KU 46944 |  [Male]  | 105 |  82 |  93 |  46 |  43 |  38 |  19
    KU 46932 | [Female] | 214 | 158 | 196 |  86 |  84 |  87 |  37
    KU 46952 | [Female] | 202 | 149 | 186 |  87 |  86 |  79 |  33
    KU 46957 | [Female] | 188 | 138 | 167 |  79 |  80 |  68 |  31
    KU 46959 | [Female] | 156 | 118 | 149 |  71 |  71 |  70 |  29
    KU 46962 | [Female] | 132 | 101 | 119 |  58 |  53 |  51 |  24
  -----------+----------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------

Ground color of carapace (hereinafter, colors are those of preserved
specimen) dark olive; upper surface of each marginal scute having
round or oval black mark, two such marks on each marginal of first
pair; marks on margin of anterior half of carapace having pale
orange-yellow borders, marks more posteriorly having indistinct
borders or no border; upper surface of carapace having numerous,
irregularly arranged black marks on a faint reticulum of pale lines;
one or two large oval marks on each lateral scute arranged more or
less vertically, other marks on laterals irregular in size and
arrangement; central scutes having three to five longitudinally
arranged, narrow black marks on each scute.

Ground color of plastron pale yellow, anterior half extensively marked
with black along laminal seams; all plastral markings interconnected;
undersurfaces of marginals on anterior half of shell having pale
centers; undersurfaces of posterior marginals and posterior half of
plastron solid black.

Plastron more or less evenly rounded in front, slightly indented on
gular border; posterolateral free edge of plastron reflected slightly
downward; posterior border of plastron having wide shallow anal notch;
plastral laminae, in order of length--abdominal, anal, pectoral,
gular, femoral, humeral; abdominal lamina longer than combined lengths
of pectoral and humeral or humeral and gular.

Head moderately wide; snout slightly pointed in dorsal view, curving
evenly backward and downward from nostrils in profile; upper jaw
notched in middle, cutting edges finely and unevenly serrate, crushing
surfaces having distinct ridge bearing fine denticulations but no
large teeth; cutting edges of lower jaw coarsely and evenly serrate,
tooth at symphysis relatively large; raised ridges of lower crushing
surfaces each having low blunt tooth and many fine denticulations.

Major markings of head and neck as follows: narrow stripe beginning
at posterior edge of eye and extending downward and backward (across
tympanum) on side of neck to shoulder (stripe wider behind than at
origin); wide stripe from lower posterior corner of eye extending
downward, across mandibular articulation (and below tympanum) on
throat to shoulder (wider at origin than behind); postorbital mark,
four to five millimeters wide, approximately 26 millimeters long,
connected to eye by narrow isthmus anteriorly and continuous with
narrow stripe on upper part of neck posteriorly; stripe on mandibular
symphysis widened and bifurcated posteriorly, its two branches
enclosing one wide and two narrow stripes; wide stripe beginning
in middle of mandibular ramus and running backward to point below
mandibular articulation on each side; top of head, sides of snout, and
areas between above-mentioned major stripes, marked with numerous,
fine, often indistinct pale lines.

Pale dorsal stripe on fleshy portion of each finger, those of second
and fourth fingers continuous to mid-humeral region, those of other
fingers broken on anterior face of antebrachium; upper and lower pale
stripes of antebrachium joined in mid-humeral region.

_Coloration of living specimens._--Ground color of soft parts dark
olive to slate gray or black; ground color of carapace olive to
slate gray; ground color of plastron pale yellow, markings blackish,
tinged with brown in younger specimens, sooty black in most adults.
Postorbital mark red; other markings on soft parts cream to buffy
yellow.

_Geographic range._--_Pseudemys scripta taylori_ is known only from
ponds, and the Río Chiquito in the basin of Cuatro Ciénegas. The
discovery of _taylori_ brings to six the number of valid subspecies
of _scripta_ known in México (_elegans_, _gaigeae_, _hiltoni_,
_nebulosa_, _ornata_, and _taylori_) and to three (_elegans_,
_gaigeae_, and _taylori_) the number known in Coahuila. My own
studies of these six subspecies indicate that they are, beyond
reasonable doubt, members of a single polytypic species (_scripta_).
I tentatively follow Williams (1956:153) in rejecting "_cataspila_"
as an invalid name.

Three specimens of _Pseudemys scripta_ obtained by Robert G. Webb in
the Río Chiquito at a point 8 mi. W of Nadadores, 2100 ft., where the
river flows out of the basin of Cuatro Ciénegas, have many
characteristics in common with _taylori_, but resemble _elegans_
closely in several characters as follows: no extensive melanism;
plastral markings tending to be brownish; anterior plastral markings
smudgelike, isolated or nearly isolated; markings on lateral scutes
tending to have vertical, linear arrangement; cutting edge of mandible
weakly serrate; femoral edges of plastron not reflected ventrally; one
or more fine, pale lines between two major stripes on antebrachium;
gular longer than pectoral in one specimen, longer than femoral in
both specimens. The nature of these specimens suggests that parts of
the Río Salado drainage north and east of Cuatro Ciénegas are in a
zone of intergradation between _taylori_ and _elegans_. I have
examined what I consider to be typical examples of _P. s._ _elegans_
from the region of Múzquiz (CNHM 28843-45, 55625-45), and from Don
Martín Reservoir (KU 33524). These localities are, respectively,
approximately 70 miles north-northeast and 100 miles east-northeast of
Cuatro Ciénegas. The specimens from Múzquiz are presumably the same
that Carr (1952:262) treated as "... _elegans-cataspila_ intergrades,
but with a strong leaning toward eastern _elegans_...." Populations of
_P. scripta_ in central eastern Coahuila (between the above-mentioned
localities and Cuatro Ciénegas) probably are a conglomerate of only
two subspecies (_elegans_ and _taylori_), not including _gaigeae_ (as
was suggested by Hamilton, 1947:65 and by Carr, op. cit.:241, map
17;262).

Specimens reported by Schmidt and Owens (1944:101) as _P. s. gaigeae_
(from several localities in the region mentioned above) have been
examined in the course of my study and prove to be _P. floridana
texana_. A specimen reported by Shannon and Smith (1949:399; IU 4094,
Hidalgo Co., Texas) as being either _gaigeae_ or an _elegans-gaigeae_
intergrade, has been examined and is here regarded as a typical
specimen of _elegans_. I regard _P. s. gaigeae_ as a subspecies of the
upper Río Grande and disrupted parts of that drainage; the range of
that subspecies meets that of _P. s. elegans_ somewhere between the
Big Bend region and Piedras Negras. In any event, the influence of
_gaigeae_ is not so widespread as other authors (Carr, _loc. cit._;
Hamilton, _loc. cit._; Hartweg, 1939:3-4) have indicated.

Further collecting in the Río Salado and its tributaries east and
north of Cuatro Ciénegas will be necessary before the exact range of
_P. s. taylori_ can be determined.

_Variation._--Characteristics ascribed to the holotype pertain in
general to all specimens in the hypodigm, except as noted below. The
postorbital mark is in contact with the eye on one or both sides in 46
per cent of the specimens (narrowly separated from eye in remainder)
and is in contact with a neck stripe (on one or both sides) in 35 per
cent of the specimens. The pattern of the antebrachium is as shown in
Fig. 2 in all specimens except that the thin lateral stripe is
obliterated by melanism in older specimens of both sexes. The lateral
edges of the posterior plastral lobe are reflected downward, at least
slightly, in all but one specimen (an adult, kyphotic female). The
first central lamina is straight-sided in juveniles and becomes
urn-shaped only in adults. The relative height of the shell tends to
increase with a general increase in size in both sexes.

    [Illustration: FIG. 1. _Pseudemys scripta taylori_ new
    subspecies: left side of head, female paratype (KU 46933),
    × 1.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 2. _Pseudemys scripta taylori_ new
    subspecies: anterior view of left antebrachium, female
    paratype (KU 46934), × 1.]

_Comparisons._--Of the five other subspecies of Mexican _P. scripta_
mentioned above, three subspecies (_gaigeae_, _hiltoni_, and
_nebulosa_) form a natural group herein referred to as the _gaigeae_
group. _Pseudemys s. taylori_ is distinguished from members of the
_gaigeae_ group by elongate, red postorbital mark (yellow or orange in
the _gaigeae_ group), extensive black plastral pattern (narrow--or if
wide, brownish--in _gaigeae_ group), and serrate lower jaw (nearly
smooth in _gaigeae_ group).

The subspecies _P. scripta taylori_ differs from _P. scripta elegans_
as indicated in the following comparative list of characteristics:

          _P. s. taylori_                    _P. s. elegans_

  1. Extensive black plastral        1. Plastral pattern consisting
     pattern, all parts of which        of separate brown smudges (at
     are interconnected. Plastral       least anteriorly). Plastral
     pattern partly obliterated by      pattern obliterated by
     melanism in old individuals        melanism only in adult males.
     of both sexes.

  2. Markings of carapace in form    2. Markings of carapace having
     of indistinct ocelli.              linear and vertical.

  3. Cutting edge of mandible        3. Cutting edge of mandible
     serrate.                           smooth.

  4. Foreclaws of mature males       4. Foreclaws of mature males
     unmodified.                        greatly elongated.

  5. Gular shorter than pectoral     5. Gular longer than pectoral
     (91 per cent of specimens),        (90 per cent of specimens)
     gular and femoral subequal.        and longer than femoral (all
                                        specimens).

  6. Shell relatively higher,        6. Shell relatively lower,
     posterior lobe of plastron         posterior lobe of plastron
     relatively narrower (Fig. 3).      relatively wider (Fig. 3).

  7. Lateral edges of posterior      7. Lateral edges of posterior
     plastral lobe reflected            plastral lobe unmodified.
     downward.

Four specimens of _P. s. ornata_ (MCZ 46392-3, 46397, 46400, two adult
females and two adult males) from the Río Soto la Marina drainage of
Tamaulipas differ from _P. s. taylori_ as follows: plastral pattern
diffuse and brownish, not black; gular longer than pectoral; cutting
edge of lower jaw only slightly serrate; stripe on mandibular
symphysis isolated, not joined with ventral neck stripes to form
inverted Y; postorbital stripe (yellow in preservative) connected to
eye by narrow isthmus and continuous with neck stripe to shoulder.

In _P. s. taylori_ there is an obtuse ridge or prominence across the
bridge, on a line joining the free lateral edges of the plastron; the
area between the ridges is nearly flat. The bridge forms a distinct
plane on each side between the mentioned ridge and the outer edges of
the marginals. In cross section this plane forms an angle of 30 to 45
degrees with the horizontal plane of the plastron. The higher bridge
and deeper shell of _taylori_ result in a slightly higher center of
gravity in this subspecies than in the specimens of _elegans_ and
_ornata_ I have examined. In the two subspecies last named the
longitudinal ridges on the plastron are indistinct or wanting and the
bridge forms a lesser angle with the horizontal plane of the plastron.

The largest female of _taylori_ (218 mm.) is shorter by some 30 mm.
than the smaller female in the series of _ornata_ from Tamaulipas
whereas the largest male of _taylori_ (179 mm.) is shorter by some
80 mm. than the smaller male from Tamaulipas. _Pseudemys s. taylori_
probably is smaller, on the average, than either _elegans_ or northern
populations of _ornata_.

There seems to be no reliable published record of the color of
the postorbital mark in living examples of _P. s. ornata_ from
Tamaulipas. Williams (1956:147, 154) indicated that this color may be
red or yellow for Mexican and Central American populations of _ornata_
in general and Günther (1885: Pl. 6 b) indicated that the color
was yellow in _Emys cataspila_; however, both of the observations
mentioned were presumably based on preserved rather than living
specimens. The postorbital marks of a live specimen of _ornata_
(KU 40131) from southern Veracruz were yellowish to buffy with a
pinkish tinge anteriorly (_fide_ notes of Robert G. Webb and a color
photograph by him).

    [Illustration: FIG. 3. Relative height of shell (expressed
    as a percentage of width) and relative width of posterior
    plastral lobe (expressed as a percentage of plastral length)
    in two subspecies of _Pseudemys scripta_. The data presented
    are for 62 specimens (40 [Female], 22 [Male]) of _P. s.
    taylori_ and 37 specimens (13 [Female], 24 [Male]) of _P. s.
    elegans_. Horizontal and vertical lines represent the mean
    and range, respectively, whereas open and solid rectangles
    represent one standard deviation and two standard errors of
    the mean, respectively.]

    [Illustration: PLATE 9
    _Pseudemys scripta taylori_ new subspecies: dorsal view of
    holotype (KU 46952), approximately 11/16 natural size.]

    [Illustration: PLATE 10
    _Pseudemys scripta taylori_ new subspecies: ventral view of
    holotype (KU 46952), approximately 11/16 natural size.]

    [Illustration: PLATE 11
    Paratypes of _Pseudemys scripta taylori_ new subspecies:
    _Left_--dorsal and ventral views of KU 46943, male, 16 km. S
    Cuatro Ciénegas, × 3/8; _Upper right_--KU 46974, juvenile, 6
    mi. W Cuatro Ciénegas, × 5/6; _Lower right_--KU 46968, male,
    16 km. S Cuatro Ciénegas, × 3/8.]

    [Illustration: PLATE 12
    Ventral views of four subspecies of _Pseudemys scripta_:
    _Upper left_--_P. s. ornata_ (KU 40131 [Female]), Río
    Playa Vicente, San Andrés Tuxtla, Veracruz, × 1/3; _Upper
    right_--_P. s. gaigeae_ (IU 43583 [Female]), 1 mi. E La Cruz,
    Chihuahua, × 3/8; _Lower left_--_P. s. elegans_ (CNHM 55627
    [Male]), Múzquiz, Coahuila, × 2/3; _Lower right_--_P. s.
    taylori_ new subspecies (KU 46970 juvenile), paratype, 6 mi.
    W Cuatro Ciénegas, Coahuila, × 11/16.]

_Natural history._--Specimens of _P. s. taylori_ were caught in hoop
nets in clear deep pools and in the Río Chiquito. No specimens were
collected or observed in marshy situations where the water was shallow
or stagnant. Individuals were seen only near dusk and in early morning
when a number floated just below the surface with only their heads
showing. They were never seen on land during our short stay in the
basin. The few stomachs that were opened contained vegetable material.
In terms of number of specimens trapped, _P. s. taylori_ was the most
abundant turtle in pools at and near the type locality (Webb and
Legler, 1960).

_Relationships and phylogeny._--The basin of Cuatro Ciénegas now
drains, via the Río Salado, into the lower Río Grande. Brief
descriptions of habitats and topography in the basin are given by
Gilmore (1947:148-150, fig. 2) and Webb and Legler (1960). In the more
northern parts of the Salado drainage (for example, in the Río Sabinas
near Múzquiz) slider turtles are typical _P. s. elegans_. Assuming
that conditions which permit genetic exchange between populations of
turtles in the Salado drainage system differ in no major respect from
conditions in other parts of the range of _Pseudemys scripta_, it is
logical to suppose that the differentiation of _P. s. taylori_ at
Cuatro Ciénegas was preceded by the isolation of a population in that
basin.

The Río Chiquito drains through a narrow gap in the northeastern end
of the basin of Cuatro Ciénegas. Interruption of this stream would
effectively isolate aquatic habitats in the basin.

It is here proposed that _P. s. taylori_ is a relict of an earlier,
lower Río Grande stock, part of which became isolated in the basin of
Cuatro Ciénegas in postpluvial times. The morphological similarity of
_P. s. taylori_ and _P. s. elegans_ indicates that both were derived
from this parent stock; similarity of both subspecies to populations
of _P. s. ornata_ in Tamaulipas suggests that the latter subspecies
may also be a derivative of the mentioned stock of the lower Río
Grande.

The proposed former isolation of the basin of Cuatro Ciénegas is
supported by evidence found in studies of other turtles in the basin.
Of the four kinds of turtles known to occur there (_Terrapene
coahuila_, _P. s. taylori_, _Trionyx spinifer emoryi_, and _Trionyx
ater_), all but _T. spinifer_ seem to be endemic. These three kinds
comprise a graded series, in regard to their degree of differentiation
from closest known relatives, as follows: 1) _Terrapene coahuila_ is
morphologically the most generalized and primitive of living box
turtles; the species is unique in its highly aquatic mode of life (see
Legler, 1960:532-534, for brief discussion of relationships within
genus Terrapene); 2) _Trionyx ater_ seems to represent a relict
population of pre-_Trionyx spinifer_ stock; presumably, _spinifer_ has
reinvaded the basin of Cuatro Ciénegas in relatively recent times
and, as noted above, _spinifer_ and _ater_ now occur sympatrically (at
least in a geographic sense) in the basin (Webb and Legler, _op.
cit._); and, 3) evidence presented above suggests that _P. s. taylori_
intergrades with _P. s. elegans_ outside the basin.

The three endemic populations of turtles at Cuatro Ciénegas therefore,
differ by varying degrees from their closest living relatives. This
variation in degree of difference possibly results from varying
periods of isolation. Probably the basin of Cuatro Ciénegas has been
isolated from, and reconnected to, the lower Río Grande drainage at
several times in the past. The relationships of fishes in the basin,
now under study by other workers, also suggest that the basin was
isolated more than once.

_Remarks._--Local names for the above-mentioned localities in the
basin of Cuatro Ciénegas are as follows: Anteojo (6 mi. W Cuatro
Ciénegas); El Mojarral (8.5 mi. SW); and Ojo de Agua de Tío Candido,
on Rancho Orozco (16 km. S). The Río Chiquito is referred to by some
natives as "Río Colorado" and by some as "Río Salado." The local name
for _P. s. taylori_ is _tortuga negra_ (the name is used also for
_Terrapene coahuila_).

_Acknowledgments._--For permission to examine specimens in their care,
I wish to thank Doris M. Cochran, Smithsonian Institution (USNM),
Ernest E. Williams, Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ), Rollin H.
Baker, Michigan State University (MSU), Hobart M. Smith, University of
Illinois (IU), and Robert F. Inger, Chicago Natural History Museum
(CNHM). Pete S. Chrapliwy, John K. Greer, Robert G. Webb, and Kenneth
L. Williams all contributed field data concerning the specimens of
_P. s. taylori_ that they collected. I am especially grateful to Webb
for donating two specimens to the University of Utah (UU). Special
gratitude is expressed to Wendell L. Minckley and Robert B. Wimmer
for assistance with field work at Cuatro Ciénegas. Daniel Rodríguez,
Cuatro Ciénegas, guided us to the various ponds at and near the type
locality. Robert R. Miller, Robert G. Webb, and Donald Tinkle read the
manuscript and offered helpful criticisms. Figures 1 and 2 were drawn
by Lorna Cordonnier.

_Comparative materials examined_ (total of 135 specimens).--_P. s.
elegans_ (52 specimens): KU 2897-8, 3195, 18337, 18341, 18345, 18347,
18364, 45027-31, 45033, 46750, 46863, and John M. Legler 1394 and
1435, various localities, Kansas; KU 16400, Howard Co., Texas; KU
39983-4, 8 mi. N and 2 mi. W Piedras Negras, Coahuila; KU 33525,
33527-9, La Gacha, Coahuila; CNHM 28843-5, 55625-45, Rancho las
Ruscias, Múzquiz, Coahuila; KU 39982, 2 mi. S and 3 mi. E San Juan de
Sabinas, Coahuila; KU 33524, Don Martín Reservoir, Coahuila; _P. s.
elegans_ × _taylori_ (3): KU 53785-7, 8 mi. W. Nadadores, Coahuila;
_P. s. gaigeae_ (39): MCZ 54724, Elephant Butte Reservoir [Sierra or
Socorro Co.], New Mexico; KU 51158-61, 51202-3, Lajitas, Brewster Co.,
Texas; KU 51162-6, 51204-6, 51315, 1 mi. NW Ojinaga, Chihuahua; KU
33884, 51167-72, 51207-20, 3 mi. N and 5 mi. E Meoqui, Chihuahua; IU
43583-4, La Cruz, Chihuahua; _P. s. ornata_ (9): MCZ 46392-3, Río
Purificación, Rancho Sta. Ana, Tamaulipas; MCZ 46397, E of Güémez,
Tamaulipas; MCZ 46400, Jiménez, Tamaulipas; KU 40161-2, Alvarado,
Veracruz; KU 40131, San Andrés Tuxtla, Veracruz; V. E. Thatcher 98, 15
mi. N Teapa, Tabasco; KU 40139, Cantemo[c], Tabasco; _P. s. taylori_
(23 in addition to type series): KU 51438, 51442, 53788-53801
topotypes; KU 53802-5, 8.5 mi. SW Cuatro Ciénegas, Coahuila; KU
51439-41, 10 km. S Cuatro Ciénegas, Coahuila; _P. floridana texana_
(10 from Coahuila): KU 39985, 2 mi. W Jiménez; CNHM 55654, Allende;
CNHM 55646, Cd. San Juan; CNHM 55648, Hermanas; CNHM 55649-53,
Lampacitas; KU 33526, Don Martín Reservoir.


                           LITERATURE CITED

  CARR, A.
    1952.  Handbook of turtles: the turtles of the United States,
           Canada, and Baja California. Cornell Univ. Press,
           xv+542 pp., 82 pls., 37 figs., 15 tables, 23 maps.

  GILMORE, R. M.
    1947.  Report on a collection of mammalian bones from
           archeologic cave-sites in Coahuila, Mexico. Journ.
           Mammalogy, 28(2):147-165, 1 pl., 2 figs., 1 table.

  GÜNTHER, A.
    1885.  Biologia Centrali-Americana. Reptilia and Batrachia.
           Chelonia, pp. 1-18.

  HAMILTON, R. D.
    1947.  The range of _Pseudemys scripta gaigeae_. Copeia,
           1947(1):65-66.

  HARTWEG, N.
    1939.  A new American _Pseudemys_. Occas. Papers Mus. Zool.
           Univ. Michigan, no. 397, 4 pp.

  LEGLER, J. M.
    1960.  Natural history of the ornate box turtle, _Terrapene
           ornata ornata_ Agassiz. Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat.
           Hist., 11(10):527-669, pls. 15-30, 29 figs.

  SCHMIDT, K. P., and OWENS, D. W.
    1944.  Amphibians and reptiles of northern Coahuila, Mexico.
           Zool. Ser., Field Mus. Nat. Hist., 29(6):97-115.

  SHANNON, F. A., and SMITH, H. M.
    1949.  Herpetological results of the University of Illinois
           field expedition, spring 1949. I. Introduction,
           Testudines, Serpentes. Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci.,
           52(4):494-509.

  WEBB, R. G., and LEGLER, J. M.
    1960.  A new softshell turtle (genus _Trionyx_) from Coahuila,
           Mexico. Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull., 40(2):21-30, 2 pls.,
           April 20.

  WILLIAMS, E.
    1956.  _Pseudemys scripta callirostris_ from Venezuela with a
           general survey of the scripta series. Bull. Mus. Comp.
           Zool., 115(5):145-160, Pls. I-III, 4 figs.

    _Department of Zoology and Entomology, University of Utah,
    Salt Lake City, Utah, Transmitted May 23 1960._


                                28-3860





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A New Subspecies of Slider Turtle
(Pseudemys scripta) from Coahuila, Mexico, by John M. Legler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLIDER TURTLE ***

***** This file should be named 31574-8.txt or 31574-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/7/31574/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
