Project Gutenberg's Genera of Leptodactylid Frogs in México, by John D. Lynch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Genera of Leptodactylid Frogs in México

Author: John D. Lynch

Release Date: March 30, 2010 [EBook #31830]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEPTODACTYLID FROGS IN MEXICO ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net











UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 17, No. 11, pp. 503-515, 5 figs.
March 20, 1968



Genera of Leptodactylid Frogs in México


BY

JOHN D. LYNCH


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1968




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Frank B. Cross


Volume 17, No. 11, pp. 503-515, 5 figs.
Published March 20, 1968


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED BY
ROBERT R. (BOB) SANDERS, STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1968

31-9418




Genera of Leptodactylid Frogs in México

BY JOHN D. LYNCH


INTRODUCTION

According to the most recent review of the Mexican amphibian fauna
(Smith and Taylor, 1948), six genera of leptodactylid frogs occur in
México. One other genus, _Pleurodema_, occurs in Lower Central America.
Smith and Taylor recognized one species of _Engystomops_, 28 of
_Eleutherodactylus_, three of _Leptodactylus_, eight of
_Microbatrachylus_, 12 of _Syrrhophus_, and five of _Tomodactylus_.
Subsequent to the publication of their checklist of the Mexican
amphibia (1948), numerous taxonomic changes have been proposed. Many
species of _Eleutherodactylus_ have been added to the fauna, either
through the extension of their recorded ranges into México from
Guatemala or by the recognition of species unknown in 1948, whereas
some nominal species have been synonymized. _Microbatrachylus_ has been
regarded as synonymous with _Eleutherodactylus_ (Lynch, 1965); four
species of _Microbatrachylus_ currently are regarded as valid
(Duellman, 1961, Lynch, 1965). _Syrrhophus_ was revised in part by
Duellman (1958) and Firschein (1954), and a species of _Tomodactylus_
transferred to _Syrrhophus_ by Dixon (1957), who redefined
_Tomodactylus_ and added more species to the genus.

Since beginning my studies of the Mexican leptodactylids in 1962, I
have become acutely aware of difficulties involved in defining the
genera. A revision of _Eleutherodactylus_ and a review of _Syrrhophus_
are nearing completion, but prior to their publication it is desirable
to redefine the genera of the Mexican leptodactylids, and in so doing
recognize an heretofore unnamed genus. The definitions of
_Eleutherodactylus_ and _Leptodactylus_ may need to be altered in the
future, since both are widespread in South America and occur in the
West Indies. Their definitions as given here are as precise as present
knowledge permits. _Syrrhophus_ and _Tomodactylus_ are small
assemblages that occur only in southwestern United States, México, and
Guatemala.

Taylor (1952) synonymized _Engystomops_ with _Eupemphix_ which,
although related, should be regarded as generically distinct (Gallardo,
1965). Perhaps the most conservative classification is that of Myers
(1962) who, without published evidence, combined _Eleutherodactylus_,
_Syrrhophus_, and the South American _Lithodytes_ in a single genus.

The major problem for students working with the Mexican leptodactylids
has not been the separation of _Engystomops_ or _Leptodactylus_ from
other genera but the separation and definition of the eleutherodactyline
frogs currently placed in three genera, _Eleutherodactylus_,
_Syrrhophus_, and _Tomodactylus_. As will be shown in this paper, these
are more conveniently placed in four genera. Once a fourth genus is
recognized, certain phylogenetic problems disappear and a reasonable
zoogeographic interpretation is possible for Middle American
leptodactylid distribution.




ANALYSIS OF CHARACTERS


In México and northern Central America approximately 55 species of
eleutherodactyline frogs (_Eleutherodactylus_, _Syrrhophus_, and
_Tomodactylus_) are known. Four genera can be recognized on the basis
of the nature of inguinal glands, morphology of the hands and feet, and
certain osteological features.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. _Tomodactylus angustidigitorum_ (UMMZ 114305,
× 4.5) illustrating the lumbo-inguinal gland typical of members of the
genus. From a kodachrome by Wm. E. Duellman.]


Glands

Leptodactylids have a variety of glands that have been used as generic
characters. Smith and Taylor (1948) regarded the so-called inguinal
gland as a generic character in Mexican eleutherodaycty-lines. Lynch
(1965) showed that _Eleutherodactylus_ and _Microbatrachylus_ cannot
be separated by the nature of the gland or the condition of the
prevomers (dentate or not). _Syrrhophus_ and _Tomodactylus_, as defined
by Smith and Taylor (1948), are not generically distinct because of
overlap in the condition of the prevomers and in the development of the
gland. Firschein (1954) stated that _Syrrhophus_ differed from
_Tomodactylus_ by having an axillary gland, but it is now known that
one species of _Syrrhophus_ lacks the gland.

The inguinal glands of _Eleutherodactylus_ and _Syrrhophus_, if
present, are diffuse, irregular in outline, and generally not
prominent; in _Tomodactylus_ the gland is higher on the body (a
lumbo-inguinal gland), compact, oval in outline, and prominent (Fig.
1). Axillary glands occur in most _Syrrhophus_ but are not known in
_Tomodactylus_ or _Eleutherodactylus_.


Hands and feet

The tips of the digits are laterally expanded in most
_Eleutherodactylus_, _Syrrhophus_, and _Tomodactylus_. Two species
of _Eleutherodactylus_ (_augusti_ and _tarahumarensis_) and two
_Tomodactylus_ (_angustidigitorum_ and _grandis_) lack any expansion
of the digital tips. All but two of the species of eleutherodactyline
frogs (_E. augusti_ and _E. tarahumarensis_) have a transverse groove
across the tips of the digits (Fig. 2).

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Palmar views of the hands and lateral views of
the tip of the third digits of _Eleutherodactylus alfredi_ (left, KU
93994, × 5) and _Hylactophryne augusti_ (right, KU 102594, × 3).]

Supernumerary tubercles rarely are present on the feet of
_Eleutherodactylus_, but are present and numerous in every species of
_Syrrhophus_, _Tomodactylus_, and in the members of the _augusti_ group
of _Eleutherodactylus_ (Fig. 3). The tubercles are small and numerous
in _Syrrhophus_ and larger in _Tomodactylus_ and the _Eleutherodactylus
augusti_ group. Most species of _Eleutherodactylus_ have no plantar
supernumerary tubercles; a few species have such tubercles, which never
extend between the metatarsal tubercles as in _Syrrhophus_ and
_Tomodactylus_.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Plantar views of feet of _Eleutherodactylus
alfredi_ (left, KU 93994, × 4.5), _Syrrhophus pipilans nebulosus_
(middle, KU 58900, × 7.5), and _Hylactophryne augusti_ (right, KU
102594, × 3) showing differences in size and arrangement of
supernumerary tubercles.]

Tarsal folds and tubercles are lacking in _Syrrhophus_, _Tomodactylus_,
and the _augusti_ group of _Eleutherodactylus_. Several species of
_Eleutherodactylus_ lack tarsal folds and tubercles, but in nearly
every species group, one or more species possess either an inner tarsal
fold, inner tarsal tubercle(s), or outer tarsal tubercles.

The terminal phalanges of _Syrrhophus_, _Tomodactylus_, and all
_Eleutherodactylus_ (except the frogs of the _augusti_ group) are
distinctly T-shaped. In the latter, the bones are knob-shaped distally
(Fig. 4). T-shaped terminal phalanges also are present in _Lithodytes_
and _Trachyphrynus_ but not in other leptodactylid genera. At least one
species of _Eupsophus_ (_E. quixensis_) has terminal phalanges that
resemble those of the _Eleutherodactylus augusti_ group. Several
species of _Eleutherodactylus_, _Syrrhophus_, and _Tomodactylus_ with
slender fingers have T-shaped terminal phalanges although the terminal
dilations proportionately are only scarcely wider than the finger tips
in the _Eleutherodactylus augusti_ group. The presence of a terminal
groove at the tip of the finger is an external indicator of the
T-shaped terminal phalanges.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Terminal phalanges of four leptodactylid frogs
(all × 13.5). (a) _Eleutherodactylus mexicanus_, KU 55593; (b)
_Eupsophus roseus_, KU 84731; (c) _Eupsophus quixensis_, UIMNH 59643;
and (d) _Hylactophryne augusti_, KU 56192.]


Skull

All Mexican eleutherodactyline frogs have quadratojugal-maxillary
articulations, completely roofed skulls in adults, median contact of
the nasals, separated occipital condyles, and large prevomers. The
premaxillae of all species are visible when the skulls are viewed from
directly above. The pterygoid lacks a medioventral flange and does not
meet the palatine. In no species is the anterior arm of the squamosal
in contact with the maxillary. Of the numerous species examined (30
_Eleutherodactylus_, four _Syrrhophus_, and four _Tomodactylus_), the
species in the _Eleutherodactylus augusti_ group are unique in having a
sphenethmoid with a blunt anterior edge.


Pectoral Girdle

All species have large cartilaginous plates in the pectoral girdles;
none possesses a bony style. No divergent modifications of the clavicle
and coracoid bones are known in the family.




GENERIC ACCOUNTS


Genus ~Eleutherodactylus~ Dumeril and Bibron, 1841

     _Type-species._--_Hylodes martinicensis_ Tschudi, 1838

     _Diagnosis and definition._--Small to large frogs (12 to 110
     mm. snout-vent length) having slightly to widely expanded
     digital pads, each pad bearing a terminal transverse groove;
     lumbo-inguinal, inguinal, and axillary glands absent, or if
     present, diffuse, irregular in outline, not compact; plantar
     supernumerary tubercles absent, or if present, six or fewer,
     restricted to distal area of plantar surface, and not
     extending between metatarsal tubercles; tarsus bearing inner
     or outer tubercles or folds or not; toes free to one-half
     webbed; terminal phalanges T-shaped; sternum cartilaginous,
     lacking bony style; sphenethmoid not truncate anteriorly;
     nasals in contact medially; maxillary and quadratojugal in
     contact; anterior arm of squamosal not in contact with
     maxillary; dermal cranial elements not involved in
     integumentary-cranial co-ossification; prevomers large,
     dentigerous processes present or not, dentate or not;
     maxillary and premaxillary bones dentate; occipital condyles
     separated; development direct.

     _Composition._--About 420 names have been applied to frogs
     of this genus; many of these names are synonyms, and many
     other species remain undescribed and unnamed. Perhaps the
     genus contains 350 species. Thirty-one species occur in
     México and northern Central America.

     _Distribution._--From Tamaulipas and Sinaloa, México,
     exclusive of the Mexican Plateau, to at least Peru and
     southernmost Brazil and throughout the West Indies.
     Introduced into Florida.

     _Etymology._--Greek (_eleuthero_ + _dactylus_) meaning
     free-toed.


Genus ~Engystomops~ Jiménez de la Espada, 1872

     _Type species._--_Engystomops petersi_ Jiménez de la Espada,
     1872

     _Diagnosis and definition._--Small frogs (20 to 40 mm.
     snout-vent length) having undilated digital tips lacking
     transverse grooves; lumbo-inguinal or inguinal glands
     absent; plantar supernumerary tubercles present, extending
     between metatarsal tubercles; tarsus bearing spinelike
     tubercle on inner edge; toes free; terminal phalanges
     pointed; sternum bearing bony style; spenethmoid not
     truncate anteriorly; nasals in contact medially; maxillary
     and quadratojugal in articular contact; anterior arm of
     squamosal not in contact with maxillary; dermal cranial
     elements not involved in integumentary-cranial
     co-ossification; prevomers moderate in size, lacking teeth;
     maxillary and premaxillary bones edentate; occipital
     condyles separated; tadpole free living.

     _Composition._--Four nominal species (_E. petersi_, _E.
     pustulatus_, _E. pustulosus_ and _E. schereri_).

     _Distribution._--Central Veracruz and eastern Oaxaca,
     México, to Trinidad, Bolivia, and Peru, east of the Andes.

     _Etymology._--Greek (_engys_ + _stoma_) meaning narrow-mouthed.


Genus ~Hylactophryne~ new genus

     _Type-species._--_Hylodes augusti_ Dugés, 1879

     _Diagnosis and definition._--Medium to large frogs (37 to 94
     mm. snout-vent length) having undilated digital tips lacking
     terminal grooves; lumbo-inguinal or inguinal glands absent;
     plantar supernumerary tubercles present, prominent,
     extending to but not between metatarsal tubercles; tarsus
     lacking tubercles or folds; toes free of webbing; terminal
     phalanges knob-shaped, lacking elongate lateral expansions;
     sternum cartilaginous, lacking bony style; sphenethmoid
     truncate anteriorly; nasals in contact medially; maxillary
     and quadratojugal in articular contact; anterior arm of
     squamosal not in contact with maxillary; dermal cranial
     elements not involved in integumentary-cranial
     co-ossification; prevomers large, bearing dentigerous
     processes; maxillary and premaxillary bones dentate;
     occipital condyles separated; development direct.

     _Composition._--Two species, _H. augusti_ and _H.
     tarahumarensis_, the former composed of four subspecies
     (Zweifel, 1956).

     _Distribution._--From Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas to
     Guerrero and Puebla, México, and a relict population on
     Cerro Quingola (just west of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec,
     México).

     _Etymology._--Greek (_hylactor_ + _phryne_) meaning barking
     toad; in reference to the voice and common name.


Genus ~Leptodactylus~ Fitzinger, 1826

     _Type-species._--_Leptodactylus typhonia_ Fitzinger, 1826

     _Diagnosis and definition._--Small to large frogs (30 to
     about 200 m., snout-vent length) having undilated to
     slightly expanded digital tips bearing pads, no transverse
     groove at tips of digits; lumbo-inguinal, axillary, and/or
     ventral glands present or not, low, diffuse; plantar
     supernumerary tubercles generally absent, if present not
     extending between metatarsal tubercles; tarsus bearing
     tarsal folds or not; toes free of webbing, extensive lateral
     fringes present in some species; terminal phalanges pointed,
     not T-shaped; sternum bearing bony style; sphenethmoid not
     truncate anteriorly; nasals in contact medially; maxillary
     and quadratojugal in articular contact; anterior arm of
     squamosal not in contact with maxillary; dermal cranial
     elements not involved in integumentary-cranial
     co-ossification; prevomers large, bearing dentigerous
     processes; maxillary and premaxillary bones dentate;
     occipital condyles separated; tadpole free living.

     _Composition._--Sixty species according to Smith and Taylor
     (1948); 54 according to Gorham (1963); Argentinian authors
     have described several more in recent years.

     _Distribution._--Southern Sonora, México, and southern Texas
     throughout the Central and South American lowlands to
     Argentina. Also known from Hispaniola and Puerto Rico in the
     Greater Antilles and a few islands in the Lesser Antilles.

     _Entymology._--Greek (_leptos_ + _dactylus_) meaning slender
     toes.


Genus ~Syrrhophus~ Cope, 1878

     _Type-species._--_Syrrhophus marnockii_ Cope, 1878

     _Diagnosis and definition._--Small to medium sized frogs (18
     to 40 mm. snout-vent) having slight to prominent digital
     expansions with transverse groove at tip of each digit;
     lumbo-inguinal and inguinal gland flattened, irregular in
     outline, not compact and oval; axillary glands present or
     not; plantar supernumerary tubercles numerous, more than
     eight, usually extending between metatarsal tubercles;
     tarsus lacking tubercles or folds; toes free or basally
     webbed; terminal phalanges T-shaped; sternum cartilaginous,
     lacking bony style; sphenethmoid not truncate anteriorly;
     nasals in contact medially; maxillary and quadratojugal in
     articular contact; anterior arm of squamosal not in contact
     with maxillary; dermal cranial elements not involved in
     integumentary-cranial co-ossification; prevomers large,
     usually lacking dentigerous processes and teeth; maxillary
     and premaxillary bones dentate; occipital condyles
     separated; development direct.

     _Composition._--Thirteen species; the species described as,
     or later referred to, _Syrrhophus_ from Lower Central
     America and South America are _Eleutherodactylus_ or
     _Eupsophus_.

     _Distribution._--Low to moderate elevations from Sinaloa,
     México, to Guatemala on the Pacific versant; from the
     Edwards and Stockton plateaus of Texas to British Honduras
     on the Caribbean versant.

     _Etymology._--Greek, emendation of _syrrhaptos_, meaning
     sewn together in reference to the united outer metatarsals.


Genus ~Tomodactylus~ Günther, 1900

     _Type-species._--_Tomodactylus amulae_ Günther, 1900.

     _Diagnosis and definition._--Small frogs (20 to 35 mm.
     snout-vent length) having digital expansions or not, with
     transverse groove across tip of each digit; lumbo-inguinal
     gland prominently elevated, compact, oval, often patterned;
     axillary glands absent; plantar supernumerary tubercles
     numerous, more than eight, usually extending between
     metatarsal tubercles; tarsus lacking tubercles or folds; toes
     free; terminal phalanges T-shaped; sternum cartilaginous,
     lacking bony style; sphenethmoid not truncate anteriorly;
     nasals in contact medially; maxillary and quadratojugal in
     articular contact; anterior arm of squamosal not in contact
     with maxillary; dermal cranial elements not involved in
     integumentary-cranial co-ossification; prevomers large,
     usually bearing dentigerous processes; maxillary and
     premaxillary bones dentate; occipital condyles separated;
     development direct.

     _Composition._--Ten species.

     _Distribution._--The southern edge of the Mexican Plateau
     from Sinaloa to Veracruuz and onto the Oaxaca highlands and
     Sierra Madre del Sur.

     _Etymology._--Greek (_tomis_ + _dactylus_) meaning knife
     toe; in reference to either the sharp subarticular tubercles
     or the unwebbed toes.




DISCUSSION


The preceding definitions only slightly alter the present generic
limits of Mexican leptodactylids. Two species, previously regarded as
_Eleutherodactylus_, are transferred to the new genus _Hylactophryne_.
The arrangement of the species of _Syrrhophus_ and _Tomodactylus_
remains the same as concluded by Dixon (1957), Duellman (1958), and
Firschein (1954) in their reviews of the genera.

Lumbo-inguinal glands are most prominent in the genera _Pleurodema_ and
_Tomodactylus_. Various nondescript glands are present in many genera,
but none is so well developed as those of _Pleurodema_ and
_Tomodactylus_.

At least nine leptodactylid genera are either known or thought to be
terrestrial breeders lacking a free-living tadpole stage
(_Eleutherodactylus_, _Euparkerella_, _Hylactophryne_, _Niceforonia_,
_Noblella_, _Sminthillus_, _Syrrhophus_, _Tomodactylus_ and
_Trachyphrynus_). _Niceforonia_ and _Trachyphrynus_, and probably
_Hylactophryne_, are not closely related to the other genera. Direct
development probably is an adaptation to adverse environmental
conditions since many of the species occur in semi-arid or cold (Andean
páramos) areas. _Eleutherodactylus_ is generally thought to be the
stock from which _Euparkerella_, _Noblella_, and _Sminthillus_ evolved
(Griffiths, 1959) and from which _Syrrhophus_ and _Tomodactylus_ are
derived (Firschein, 1954).

The present distribution of _Hylactophryne_ (isolated on the Mexican
Plateau) and its digital form (like that of Papuan and many primitive
South American leptodactylids) suggest that the genus was isolated in
México throughout the Tertiary, whereas the other Central American
genera are either post-Pliocene derivatives of _Eleutherodactylus_ or
invaders of Central America from South America since the mid-Pliocene
land bridge was formed (Lloyd, 1963).

Piatt (1934) presented arguments against assigning _Eleutherodactylus
latrans_ to the genus _Lithodytes_ and concluded that it was a "true"
_Eleutherodactylus_. Contrary to his arguments, _latrans_ (= _augusti_
of Zweifel) and _E. tarahumarensis_ Taylor differ from all other
_Eleutherodactylus_ (and _Syrrhophus_ and _Tomodactylus_) in the nature
of the tips of the digits (external and skeletal). The digits of
_Hylactophryne_ are like those of _Eupsophus_. My study of nearly all
genera of leptodactylids indicates that Noble (1925) was correct in
suggesting that _Borborocoetes_ (= _Eupsophus_) is a close relative of
_Eleutherodactylus latrans_, although Noble's arguments were based in
part upon false evidence concerning the breeding habits of _E.
latrans_, then thought to have a free-living tadpole.

Kellogg (1932) and Piatt (1934) argued that the terminal phalanges of
_E. latrans_ were typically eleutherodactyline. The variation of this
character in _Eupsophus_ (see Fig. 4) ranges from knobbed to bifurcate
or Y-shaped (T-shaped in _Eleutherodactylus_, _Syrrhophus_ and
_Tomodactylus_) and encompasses the nature of the character represented
in _Hylactophryne_. _Eupsophus_ differs from _Hylactophryne_ in
possessing a frontoparietal fontanelle, in generally having a
maxillary-quadratojugal gap, and in having a free swimming tadpole
stage.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Outline drawings of _Leptodactylus melanonotus_
(left, KU 65704, × 2) and _Eleutherodactylus alfredi_ (right, KU 93994,
× 2).]




KEY TO MEXICAN LEPTODACTYLID GENERA


1. Small (20-40 mm.), pustular, toadlike frogs;
   maxillary and premaxillary bones not bearing teeth    _Engystomops_

   Large (20-110 mm.), smooth skinned and non-toadlike
   frogs; maxillary and premaxillary bones bearing teeth            2

2. No conspicuous waist (Fig. 5); sternum bearing
   bony style,                                         _Leptodactylus_

   Constrictions at waist (Fig. 5); sternum
   cartilaginous, no bony style                                     3

3. Few (less than six), if any, supernumerary
   tubercles on plantar surface                    _Eleutherodactylus_

   Many (more than 8) supernumerary tubercles on
   plantar surfaces                                                 4

4. Terminal, transverse groove across tip of
   digits, especially outer two fingers, digits
   expanded or not; small frogs (18 to 40 mm.)                      5

   Tips of digits lacking transverse groove;
   digits unexpanded; medium-sized to large frogs
   (37 to 94 mm.)                                      _Hylactophryne_

5. Lumbo-inguinal gland compact, oval                   _Tomodactylus_

   Lumbo-inguinal or inguinal gland absent or
   diffuse and irregular in outline                       _Syrrhophus_




LITERATURE CITED


DIXON, J. R.

     1957. Geographic variation and distribution of the genus
           _Tomodactylus_ in Mexico. Texas Jour. Sci., 9:379-409,
           December.

DUELLMAN, W. E.

     1958. A review of the frogs of the genus Syrrhophus in
           western Mexico. Occas. Papers Mus. Zool. Univ.
           Michigan, 594:1-15, June 6.

     1961. The amphibians and reptiles of Michoacan, Mexico. Univ.
           Kansas Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist., 15:1-148, December 20.

FIRSCHEIN, I. L.

     1954. Definition of some little understood members of the
           leptodactylid genus _Syrrhophus_, with a description
           of a new species. Copeia, 1:48-58, February 19.

GALLARDO, J. M.

     1965. A proposito de los Leptodactylidae (Amphibia Anura).
           Papeis Avulsos, 17:77-87, January 30.

GORHAM, S. W.

     1963. The comparative number of species of amphibians in
           Canada and other countries. III. Summary of species
           of anurans. Canadian Field-Nat., 77:13-48, March.

GRIFFITHS, I.

     1959. The phylogeny of Sminthillus limbatus and the status of
           the Brachycephalidae (Amphibia Salientia). Proc. Zool.
           Soc. London, 132:457-87, May.

KELLOGG, R.

     1932. Mexican tailless amphibians in the United States
           National Museum. Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus., 160:224 pp.,
           March 31.

LLOYD, J. J.

     1963. Tectonic history of the south Central-American orogen,
           _in_ Childs and Beebe eds., Backbone of the Americas.
           Amer. Assoc. Petroleum Geol., pp. 88-100.

LYNCH, J. D.

     1965. A review of the eleutherodactylid frog genus
           _Microbatrachylus_ (Leptodactylidae). Nat. Hist. Misc.,
           182:1-12, December 15.

MYERS, G. S.

     1962. The American leptodactylid frog genus _Eleutherodactylus_,
           _Hylodes_ (= _Elosia_), and _Caudiverbera_
           (= _Calytocephalus_). Copeia, 1:195-202, April 11.

NOBLE, G. K.

     1925. An outline of the relation of the ontogeny to
           phylogeny within the Amphibia. I. Amer. Mus. Nov.,
           165:1-17, April 16.

PIATT, J.

     1934. The systematic status of Eleutherodactylus latrans
           (Cope). Amer. Midl. Nat., 15:89-91, February 15.

SMITH, H. M. and TAYLOR, E. H.

     1948. An annotated checklist and key to the Amphibia of
           Mexico. Bull. U. S. Natl. Mus., 194:1-118. June 7.

TAYLOR, E. H.

     1952. A review of the frogs and toads of Costa Rica. Univ.
           Kansas Sci. Bull., 35:577-942, July 1.

ZWEIFEL, R. G.

     1956. A survey of the frogs of the _augusti_ group, genus
           _Eleutherodactylus_. Amer. Mus. Novitates, 1813:1-35,
           December 23.


_Transmitted July 11, 1967._


31-9418




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes


Bold text is shown within ~tildes~.

Italicized text is shown within _underscores_.

Illustrations have been moved to avoid breaking up paragraphs of text.

Page 507: Changed know to known (are not know in Tomodactylus).

Page 507: Added closing parenthesis in Fig. 2 caption after × 3.

Page 509: Changed compeltely to completely (compeltely roofed skulls).

Page 512: Veracruuz may be a typo for Veracruz (Sinaloa to Veracruuz).

Page 514: Changed two occurrences of Hylatophryne to Hylactophryne.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Genera of Leptodactylid Frogs in México, by 
John D. Lynch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEPTODACTYLID FROGS IN MEXICO ***

***** This file should be named 31830-8.txt or 31830-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/8/3/31830/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
