The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Knitting Book, by Miss Lambert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: My Knitting Book

Author: Miss Lambert

Release Date: August 22, 2010 [EBook #33502]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY KNITTING BOOK ***




Produced by Constanze Hofmann and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









            My Knitting Book.

                  By
             Miss Lambert,
(Authoress of the Hand-book of Needlework.)


             [Illustration]


                LONDON:

      JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
                 1843.

          PRICE EIGHTEEN PENCE.




               Richards,
       100, St. Martin's Lane.




PREFACE.


The examples of knitting, contained in the following pages, have been
selected with the greatest care,--many are original,--and the whole are
so arranged as to render them comprehensible even to a novice in the
art.

Knitting being so often sought, as an evening amusement, both by the
aged and by invalids, a large and distinct type has been adopted,--as
affording an additional facility. The writer feels confident in the
recommendation of "MY KNITTING BOOK," and humbly hopes it may meet with
the same liberal reception that has been accorded to her "HAND-BOOK OF
NEEDLEWORK."

The numerous piracies that have been committed on her last mentioned
work, have been one inducement to publish this little volume; and from
the low price at which it is fixed, nothing, but a very extended
circulation, can ensure her from loss. Some few of the examples have
been selected from the chapter on knitting, in the "HAND-BOOK."

    _3, New Burlington Street_,
        _November 1843._




CONTENTS.


    EXPLANATION OF TERMS USED IN KNITTING                              9
    THE STANDARD FILIÈRE                                              12
    SIBERIAN CUFFS                                                    13
    A KNITTED SILK CUFF                                               13
    OPEN STITCH FOR CUFFS                                             14
    VERY PRETTY CUFFS                                                 14
    MUFFATEES WITH TWO COLOURS                                        16
    GENTLEMEN'S MUFFATEES                                             17
    PLAIN RIBBED MUFFATEES                                            17
    ANOTHER PAIR OF MUFFATEES                                         18
    KNITTED CUFFS, SHELL PATTERN                                      18
    DOUBLE KNITTED CUFFS                                              20
    A BRIOCHE                                                         21
    FRINGE PATTERN KNITTING                                           23
    AN OPERA CAP                                                      24
    A SONTAG, OR CEPHALINE                                            26
    A BONNET CAP                                                      28
    DOUBLE KNITTING FOR COMFORTERS, ETC.                              29
    KNITTED LACE                                                      29
    KNITTED INSERTION                                                 31
    CORAL TRIMMING FOR A MUSLIN DRESS                                 32
    BARLEY-CORN STITCH                                                32
    A MUFF, IN COLOURS OF SABLE                                       33
    ANOTHER MUFF                                                      34
    CLOSE STITCH FOR A WAISTCOAT, ETC                                 34
    LONG SLEEVES TO WEAR UNDER THE DRESS                              35
    TWELVE PATTERNS FOR D'OYLEYS, TIDIES, ETC.                        36
      I.--LEAF AND TRELLIS PATTERN                                    36
      II.--ROSE-LEAF PATTERN                                          40
      III.--POINT PATTERN                                             42
      IV.--GOTHIC PATTERN                                             43
      V.--SCOTCH PATTERN                                              44
      VI.--CHEVRON PATTERN                                            45
      VII.--VANDYKE PATTERN                                           46
      VIII.--LACE PATTERN                                             47
      IX.--FISH-BONE PATTERN                                          49
      X.--GERMAN PATTERN                                              49
      XI.--DIAMOND PATTERN                                            52
      XII.--SHELL PATTERN                                             53
    CABLE KNITTING                                                    54
    A PURSE                                                           55
    PRETTY STITCH FOR A PURSE                                         55
    A PENCE JUG, OR PURSE                                             56
    A STRONG PURSE                                                    59
    A PRETTY OPEN STITCH FOR A PURSE                                  60
    OPEN STITCH PURSE WITH BEADS                                      61
    A PURSE IN FINE SILK                                              62
    HERRINGBONE, OR SHETLAND STITCH FOR A PURSE                       62
    FIVE PRETTY PATTERNS FOR BAGS                                     63
      I.--DIAGONAL CHECK PATTERN BAG                                  63
      II.--LOZENGE PATTERN BAG                                        64
      III.--HEM-STITCH PATTERN BAG                                    65
      IV.--SPIDER PATTERN BAG                                         68
      V.--STRIPE PATTERN BAG                                          69
    A BAG, WITH BLACK OR GARNET BEADS                                 69
    KNITTED FRINGE                                                    70
    VANDYKE BORDER                                                    71
    A WARM HALF-SQUARE SHAWL                                          73
    A WARM DOUBLE KNITTED SCARF, IN TWO COLOURS                       74
    A BORDER FOR A SHAWL OR QUILT                                     75
    RAISED KNITTING FOR A SHAWL                                       76
    A RUSSIAN SHAWL, IN BRIOCHE STITCH                                77
    A LIGHT STITCH FOR A SHAWL                                        77
    STAR PATTERN SHAWL, IN TWO COLOURS                                78
    BARÈGE KNITTING FOR SHAWLS                                        79
    A SHETLAND KNITTED SCARF                                          80
    SHETLAND PATTERN FOR A SHAWL                                      82
    OTHER PATTERNS FOR SHAWLS                                         83
    DOUBLE DIAMOND STITCH FOR A QUILT                                 83
    A QUILT                                                           84
    A LIGHT AND WARM COUNTERPANE                                      85
    CROSS STITCH PATTERN FOR A QUILT                                  86
    ANOTHER QUILT                                                     88
    A QUILT, OR COUVRE-PIED, IN SQUARES                               89
    A COVER FOR AN AIR PILLOW                                         92
    A BABY'S HOOD                                                     92
    A BABY'S SOCK                                                     97
    ANOTHER BABY'S SOCK                                               99
    A BABY'S STOCKING                                                100
    A CARRIAGE BOOT                                                  102
    A DOUBLE-KNITTED NIGHT SOCK                                      104
    A FRILEUSE OR NECK TIPPET                                        106
    WHEEL PATTERN FOR TIDIES, ETC                                    106
    KNITTED CORAL                                                    107
    HINTS ON KNITTING                                                107




MY KNITTING BOOK.




Explanation of Terms used in Knitting.


_To cast on._--The first interlacement of the cotton on the needle.

_To cast off._--To knit two stitches, and to pass the first over the
second, and so on to the last stitch, which is to be secured by drawing
the thread through.

_To cast over._--To bring the cotton forward round the needle.

_To narrow._--To lessen, by knitting two stitches together.

_To seam._--To knit a stitch with the cotton before the needle.

_To widen._--To increase by making a stitch, bringing the cotton round
the needle, and knitting the same when it occurs.

_A turn._--Two rows in the same stitch, backwards and forwards.

_To turn._--To change the stitch.

_To turn over._--To bring the wool forward over the needle.

_A row._--The stitches from one end of the needle to the other.

_A round._--A row, when the stitches are on two, three, or more needles.

_A plain row._--That composed of simple knitting.

_To pearl a row._--To knit with the cotton before the needle.

_To rib._--To work alternate rows of plain and pearl knitting.

_To bring the thread forward._--To bring the cotton forward so as to
make an open stitch.

_A loop stitch._--Made by bringing the cotton before the needle, which,
in knitting the succeeding stitch, will again take its own place.

_To slip or pass a stitch._--To change it from one needle to the other
without knitting it.

_To fasten on._--The best way to fasten on is to place the two ends
contrariwise, and knit a few stitches with both together. For knitting,
with silk, or fine cotton, a _weaver's_ knot will be found the best.

_To take under._--To pass the cotton from one needle to the other,
without changing its position.

_Pearl, seam, and rib-stitch_--All signify the same.

N.B. The _sizes_ of the _needles_ are given according to the _Standard
Filière_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following engraving represents the _Standard Filière_, or knitting
and netting needle gauge, an instrument invented some time since by the
authoress, and now in general use, by which the different sizes of
knitting and netting needles can be ascertained with the greatest
accuracy.

[Illustration: The Standard Filière.]

It is necessary, in giving or following directions for knitting, to
caution knitters to observe a medium in their work--not knitting either
too loose or too tight.




Siberian Cuffs.


Nine shades of German wool, used double, will be required.--No. 8
needles.

Cast on sixty-four stitches with the darkest shade;--knit three plain
rows.

_Fourth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two together.

Repeat these four rows, (which form the pattern), nine times,--taking a
lighter shade of wool each time.




A Knitted Silk Cuff.


Coarse black netting silk.--Four needles, No. 22. Cast on twenty-eight
stitches on each of three needles:--knit two plain rounds.

_Third round_--bring the silk forward, slip one; knit one; pass the
slipped stitch over it; knit one; pearl one.

Repeat the third round, until the cuff be of the depth required;
then,--knit two plain rounds to correspond with the commencement.




Open Stitch for Cuffs.


With coarse silk.--Four needles, No. 22.

Cast on any even number of stitches, on each of three needles.

_First round_--knit two together.

_Second round_--bring the silk forward, knit one.

_Third round_--plain knitting.

Repeat from the first round.




Very Pretty Cuffs.


Two colours are generally used--say red and white. They are prettiest in
four-thread embroidery fleecy, or German wool.--Two needles No. 16, and
two No. 20, will be required.

    Cast on forty-six stitches.                }
    Bring the wool forward, knit two together. } white.
    Knit six plain rows.                       }

    Knit six plain rows.                       }
    Bring the wool forward, knit two together. } red.
    Knit six plain rows.                       }

    Knit six plain rows.                       }
    Bring the wool forward, knit two together. } white.
    Knit six plain rows.                       }

    Knit six plain rows.                       }
    Bring the wool forward, knit two together. } red.
    Knit six plain rows.                       }

    Knit six plain rows.                       } white.
    Bring the wool forward, knit two together. }

Take double wool, and needles double the size.

    Knit one plain row.                        }
    Pearl one row.                             }
    Knit two plain rows.                       } white.
    Pearl one row.                             }
    Knit one row.                              }

    Knit one plain row.                        } red.
    Pearl one row.                             }

Repeat these two red and white stripes, alternately, four times, and
finish with the two stitches together, as at the commencement.

The cuffs, when finished, roll over at the top.




Muffatees with two Colours.


German wool,--three needles, No. 25. The prettiest colours are cerise
and brown;--commencing with the brown. Cast on eighty-eight stitches,
viz.--thirty on each of two needles, and twenty-eight on the
third.--Knit four rounds,--two stitches of each alternately pearl and
plain.

Knit one plain round.

Pearl three rounds.

The above is all with one colour,--the brown.

Take off two stitches without knitting; knit six with the
cerise.--Repeat, alternately, to the end of the round.

The next nine rounds are the same.

Knit one plain round with the brown.

Pearl three rounds.

Commence again with the cerise,--knitting four stitches only at the
beginning of the round;--then take off two stitches, and knit six,
alternately, as before.

These cuffs may be worked to any desired length, finishing off the same
as at the commencement.




Gentlemen's Muffatees.


Cast on fifty-four stitches, in double German wool.--No. 14 needles.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, slip one; knit two
together.--Repeat.

Every row is the same,--the first and last stitches being plain. When
finished they are to be sewn up.




Plain Ribbed Muffatees.


Four needles will be required.

Cast on each of three needles, eighteen or twenty-four stitches,
according to the size desired.

_First round_--knit three; pearl three;--alternately.

_Second and succeeding rounds_--repeat the first.




Another Pair of Muffatees.


Three-thread fleecy, or Zephyr wool.--No. 13 needles.

Cast on thirty-six stitches.

Knit twenty plain stitches, and sixteen in double knitting.

When they are sufficiently large, knit or sew them up. The double
knitting comes over the hand, the plain knitting setting tight to the
wrist.




Knitted Cuffs, Shell Pattern.


These may be made either with silk, cotton, or fine wool.--Needles No.
22.

Cast thirty stitches on each of two needles, and forty on a third;--knit
one plain round.

_Second round_--pearl one; pass the silk back, knit one; pearl one;
bring the silk forward, knit one, by which you make a loop
stitch;--repeat this five times, which, with the loop stitch, will make
thirteen from the last pearled stitch. Commence the pattern again, as at
beginning of round.

_Third round_--pearl one; knit one; pearl one; slip one; knit one, pass
the slip-stitch over it; knit nine; knit two together.--Repeat to the
end of the round.

_Fourth round_--same as third, except that there will be only seven
plain stitches to knit.

_Fifth round_--same as third, with only five plain stitches.

There will now be the same number of stitches on the needles as at the
commencement, viz.--seven for the shell part of the pattern, and three
for the division.

Knit one plain round, except on the three division stitches, which are
to be knitted as before.

Commence again as at second round. When the cuffs are of sufficient
length, knit a plain round to correspond with the beginning.

The prettiest way of knitting these cuffs will be to work the first
pattern in cerise;--the next five in white; the next five, alternately
in cerise and white; then five in white; and finish with one in cerise.




Double Knitted Cuffs.


These cuffs are prettiest in single German wool; two colours are
required,--say claret and white. They will take sixteen skeins of white
wool and eight of claret--No. 13 needles.

Cast on forty-six stitches in claret,--pearl four rows. Pearl one row
white; in the next--bring the wool forward, knit two together:--repeat
these two rows of white, twice,--making altogether six rows. The four
rows of claret in pearl knitting, and the six rows of white, are now to
be repeated, alternately, until six stripes of each are worked. Then,--

Pick up seventy stitches in claret, on the right side, at one of the
narrow ends, and pearl one row. Repeat the six rows of white,--finishing
with the four rows of claret, and cast off.

Repeat the same at the other end of the cuff,--observing that the
knitting of the frill is to be on the wrong side.

Sew up the cuffs, and double them, so as to allow the frill, at the one
end, to appear above that at the other.




A Brioche[A].


The _Brioche_ knitting-stitch is simply--bring the wool forward, slip
one; knit two together.

A Brioche is formed of sixteen straight narrow stripes, and sixteen wide
stripes, the latter gradually decreasing in width towards the top or
centre of the cushion. It may be made in three-thread fleecy, or double
German wool, with ivory or wooden pins, No. 8.

Cast on ninety stitches, in black, for the narrow stripe; knit two
turns;--then, three turns in gold colour, and two turns again in black.
This completes the narrow stripe.

The conical stripe is knitted as follows:--bring the wool forward, knit
two together, twice, and turn; knit these two, and two more of the black
and turn; continue this,--taking each time two more stitches of the
black, until within two stitches of the top, and turn; the wool will now
be at the bottom or wide part of the stripe. Commence again with the
black, as in the former narrow stripe, knitting the two black stitches
at the top. It may be also as well to diminish the narrow stripes by
turning when within two stitches of the top, in the centre row of gold
colour.

By a _turn_ is meant one row and back again.

The colours for the conical stripes may be any two or four colours,
which assort well together; or each may be different. When the last
conical stripe is finished, it is to be knitted to the first narrow
stripe.--The brioche is to be made up with a stiff bottom of mill board,
about eight inches in diameter, covered with cloth. The top is drawn
together, and fastened in the centre with a tuft of soft wool, or a cord
and tassels. It should be stuffed with down or fine combed wool.

   [A] So called from its resemblance, in shape, to the well known
   French cake of that name.




Fringe Pattern Knitting.


Cast on any even number of stitches, in German wool--No. 10 needles.

Turn the wool round the needle, bringing it in front again; knit two
together, taken in front.

Every row is the same.




An Opera Cap.


No. 10 needles--Double German wool, or three-thread fleecy.

Cast on eighty stitches,--white.

    Pearl one row, } white.
    Knit one row,  }

Pearl one row,--coloured. In the next row,--

Bring the wool before the needle, and knit two stitches together.

    Pearl one row, } white.
    Knit one row,  }

    Pearl one row, } white.
    Knit one row,  }

The above forms the border.


_First division_--coloured.

Pearl one row.

Knit one row, decreasing one stitch at each end.

Knit one row.

Knit a fancy row, by bringing the wool forward, and knitting two
stitches together.


_Second_--white.

Pearl one row, decreasing one stitch at each end.

Knit one row, decreasing two stitches at each end.

Knit one row, decreasing one stitch at each end.

Knit a fancy row as before.


_Third_--coloured.

Pearl one row, decreasing one stitch at each end.

Knit one row, decreasing one stitch at each end.

Knit one row, _without_ decreasing.

Knit the fancy row as before.


_Fourth_, _Fifth_, _Sixth_, _Seventh_--

The third division is to be repeated, alternately with white and
coloured wool.


_Eighth_--white. _Ninth_--coloured.

In these two last divisions, only two stitches are to be decreased in
each; this is to be done in the row after the pearl,--decreasing one
stitch at each end.

N.B. There should be forty-six stitches left on the needle in the last
row.

Pick up thirty stitches on each side, and make the borders at the sides
and back like that in front.

Make up the cap by turning in the border to the fancy row, and hem it
all round: it is to be tied behind, and under the chin, with ribbons or
plaited wool, with tassels of the same.




A Sontag, or Cephaline


The border for this cap is worked the same as the preceding,--casting on
one hundred and two stitches;--single German wool;--No. 15 needles.

Knit one row in white, to bring the pearl on the right side. Then,--

With the darkest shade, bring the wool round the needle, pearl two
together; pearl one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

In the next row--bring the wool forward, knit two together; knit
one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

Knit forty-two rows in the same manner, taking in one stitch at the end
of almost every row, so that the number of stitches in the last row is
reduced to seventy-two, taking care to keep the pattern regular, and
changing the colour every two rows.

Take up forty stitches, on each side, and knit one row of white round
all the three sides: knit another row to make the pearl, and finish the
border with white and coloured wool, as in the preceding cap. Finish
with ribbons, or cords and tassels.

The border is knitted in white, and the middle shade of whatever colour
is used in the head piece. This is prettiest in five distinct shades of
any colour, with one or two rows of white between each division of
shade.




A Bonnet Cap.


Cast on ninety stitches, in hair-brown German wool, for border.--No. 16
needles.

_First, second, and third rows_--plain knitting.

_Fourth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two together. Then,--

Commence with another colour--say white.

_Fifth, sixth, and seventh rows_--plain knitting.

_Eighth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two together.

Repeat these last four rows seven times: then the brown border as
before. They form a band of about four inches wide, which is to be drawn
up at the two ends, and strings attached to tie it close to the chin.

Then, cast on forty stitches and commence another band with the brown
border as above,--three rows of the pattern in white, and repeat the
brown border. This is to be sewn or knitted on to the head piece, and
forms the band for the back. A ribbon is to be run through it, to tie it
close to the head.




Double Knitting for Comforters, etc.


Large-sized needles, No. 1, and four-thread fleecy, will be required.

Cast on any even number of stitches.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, slip one; pass the wool back, knit
one, turning the wool twice round the needle.--Repeat to the end of the
row.

Every succeeding row is the same.--The stitch knitted in one row, is the
slip-stitch in the next.




Knitted Lace.


Cast on twelve stitches with very fine cotton, or thread.--No. 25
needles.

_First row_--slip one; knit two; pearl one; knit two together; turn the
thread once round the needle, knit two; pearl one; knit one; turn the
thread once round the needle, knit two, taken together at the back.

_Second row_--slip one; knit one; turn the thread twice round the
needle, knit two; pearl two together; turn the thread once round the
needle, knit one; pearl two together; turn the thread twice round the
needle, pearl two together; knit one.

_Third row_--slip one; knit two; pearl one; knit two; turn the thread
once round the needle, knit two together, taken at the back; knit one;
knit two together; knit three.

_Fourth row_--slip one; turn the thread once round the needle; pearl
one; knit two together; turn the thread once round the needle, knit
four; pearl two together; turn the thread twice round the needle, pearl
two together; knit one.

_Fifth row_--slip one; knit two; pearl one; knit two; knit two together;
turn the thread twice round the needle, knit three; pearl two together;
knit one.

_Sixth row_--slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; slip one;
knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; slip one; knit one, pass the
slip-stitch over it; slip one; knit two; turn the thread once round the
needle, pearl two together; turn the thread once round the needle, pearl
two together; knit one; turn the thread twice round the needle, pearl
two together; knit one.

There should now be twelve stitches on the needle as at the
commencement.--Repeat from the first row.




Knitted Insertion.


Cast on nine stitches in fine cotton; No. 23 needles.

Slip one; knit two; bring the cotton forward, knit two together; knit
one; bring the cotton forward, knit two together; pearl one.--Repeat.

This may be used for trimming muslin curtains, etc.




Coral Trimming for a Muslin Dress.


Cast on two stitches.--No. 2 needles, rather short.

Turn the wool round the needle, so as to bring it in front again; knit
the two stitches, take together in the front.

Every row is the same.




Barley-corn Stitch.


Cast on any uneven number of stitches, with eight-thread Zephyr fleecy,
or double German wool, and No. 2 needles.

Slip the first stitch, keeping the wool in front of the needle; turn the
wool round the needle, so as to bring it in front again; knit two
together, taken in front. Continue turning the wool round the needle,
and knitting two together, to the end of the row. All the rows are the
same.

The two stitches, which are to be taken together, appear always as if
tied together.




A Muff, in colours of Sable.


Cast on seventy or eighty stitches.

_First, second, and third rows_--plain knitting.

_Fourth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two together, taken at the
back.--Repeat to the end of the row.

Repeat these four rows, until the piece be about eighteen inches long,
admitting that the shading comes in correctly.

Two No. 8 needles are required, and double German wool, in four distinct
shades to match the colour of sable. Commence with the lightest
shade,--then the second, third, and darkest, reversing them again to the
lightest.




Another Muff.


Cast on forty-five stitches.--No. 8 needles.

Every row is worked the same, with a slip-stitch at the beginning;--knit
one; pearl one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

It will require a piece of about twenty inches long, to make a moderate
sized muff, which should be lined with gros de Naples; and stuffed with
wool, and a sufficient quantity of horse-hair to retain it in shape.
Cord and tassels to match the colour of the muff, may be sewn at the
ends; or it may be drawn up with ribbons.




Close Stitch for a Waistcoat, &c.


To be knitted in two colours,--say claret and blue.--No. 18 needles.
German wool.

_First row_--with claret,--knit one; slip one.--Repeat to the end of the
row.

_Second row_--with claret,--knit one; bring the wool forward, slip one;
pass the wool back, knit one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Third row_--with claret,--slip one; knit one.--Repeat to the end of the
row.

_Fourth row_--with claret,--bring the wool forward, slip one; pass the
wool back, knit one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Fifth and sixth rows_--same as first and second,--in blue.

Commence again, as at first row.




Long Sleeves to wear under the Dress.


No. 17 needles, and six-thread embroidery fleecy.

Cast on forty-two stitches very loosely, and alternately knit, and
pearl, three stitches, for twelve turns.

Knit ten turns plain.

Knit thirty-five turns plain,--increasing one stitch at the beginning
and end of each turn.

Knit twenty turns, plain--increasing one stitch every other turn.

Repeat the twelve turns as at the commencement.




THE TWELVE FOLLOWING PATTERNS ARE INTENDED FOR D'OYLEYS, TIDIES, FISH OR
BASKET NAPKINS; THEY ARE TO BE WORKED WITH NO. 14 KNITTING COTTON, AND
NO. 19 NEEDLES.--THEY MAY ALSO BE ADAPTED, WITH A CHANGE OF MATERIAL,
FOR SHAWLS, COUNTERPANES, BAGS, AND MANY OTHER ARTICLES.




I.

Leaf and Trellis Pattern.


Cast on any number of stitches that may be divided by twenty,--twenty
stitches forming each pattern.

_First row_--pearl knitting.

_Second row_--knit five;(a) bring the thread forward, knit two together,
three times; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two together;
knit ten.--Repeat from (a).

_Third row_--pearl knitting.

_Fourth row_--knit six;(b) bring the thread forward, knit two together,
three times; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two together; knit
five; knit two together; knit two; bring the thread forward, knit
one.--Repeat from (b).

_Fifth row_--pearl knitting.

_Sixth row_--knit seven;(c) bring the thread forward, knit two together,
three times; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two together; knit
three; knit two together; knit two; bring the thread forward, knit
three.--Repeat from (c).

_Seventh row_--pearl knitting.

_Eighth row_--knit eight;(d) bring the thread forward, knit two
together, three times; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two
together; knit one; knit two together; knit two; bring the thread
forward, knit five.--Repeat from (d).

_Ninth row_--pearl knitting.

_Tenth row_--knit nine;(e) bring the thread forward, knit two together,
three times; bring the thread forward, knit two; slip one; knit two
together, pass the slipped stitch over them; knit two; bring the thread
forward, knit seven.--Repeat from (e).

_Eleventh row_--pearl knitting.

_Twelfth row_--(f) knit five; knit two together; knit two; bring the
thread forward, knit two together, three times; bring the thread
forward, knit one; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two
together.--Repeat from (f).

_Thirteenth row_--pearl knitting.

_Fourteenth row_--knit four;(g) knit two together; knit two; bring the
thread forward, knit two together, three times; bring the thread
forward, knit three; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two
together; knit three.--Repeat from (g).

_Fifteenth row_--pearl knitting.

_Sixteenth row_--knit three;(h) knit two together; knit two; bring the
thread forward, knit two together, three times; bring the thread
forward, knit five; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two
together; knit one.--Repeat from (h).

_Seventeenth row_--pearl knitting.

_Eighteenth row_--knit two; knit two together;(i) knit two; bring the
thread forward, knit two together, three times; bring the thread
forward, knit seven; bring the thread forward, knit two; slip one; knit
two together, pass the slipped stitch over them.--Repeat from (i).

_Nineteenth row_--pearl knitting.

_Twentieth row_--Commence again, as at fourth row.




II.

Rose-leaf Pattern.


This pattern may be worked with any number of stitches that can be
divided by ten, adding three stitches,--one for the symmetry of the
pattern, and two for the borders.

N.B. The termination of each row must be exactly the same (reversed) as
the commencement.

Cast on forty-three stitches; pearl one row.

_First row_--knit one;(a) pearl one; knit two together; knit two; bring
the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit
two together.--Repeat from (a).

_Second row_--knit one;(b) knit one; pearl two together; pearl one;
bring the thread forward, turning it round the needle, pearl three; turn
the thread round the needle, pearl one; pearl two together.--Repeat from
(b).

_Third row_--knit one;(c) pearl one; knit two together; bring the thread
forward, knit five; bring the thread forward, knit two together.--Repeat
from (c).

_Fourth row_--knit one; pearl two together;(d) bring the thread forward,
turning it round the needle, pearl seven; bring the thread forward,
turning it round the needle, pearl three together.--Repeat from (d).

_Fifth row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two
together; repeat, as in first row, from (a).

_Sixth row_--knit one; pearl two; bring the thread forward, turning it
round the needle, pearl one; pearl two together; repeat, as in second
row, from (b).

_Seventh row_--knit four; bring the thread forward, knit two together;
repeat, as in third row, from (c).

_Eighth row_--knit one; pearl four; bring the thread forward, turning it
round the needle, pearl three together; repeat, as in fourth row, from
(d).

_Ninth row_--Commence again, as at first row.




III.

Point Pattern.


Cast on six stitches for each pattern, and two over for the edge.

_First row_--Knit two;(a) knit two together; bring the thread forward,
knit one; bring the thread forward, knit two together; knit one.--Repeat
from (a).

_Second row_--plain knitting.

_Third row_--knit two together; knit one;(b) bring the thread forward,
knit three; bring the thread forward, knit three together.--Repeat from
(b).--At the end of this row, plain knit the two last stitches.

_Fourth row_--plain knitting.

_Fifth row_--knit two;(c) bring the thread forward, knit two together;
knit one; knit two together; bring the thread forward, knit
one.--Repeat from (c).

_Sixth row_--plain knitting.

_Seventh row_--knit three; bring the thread forward, knit three
together; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.--At the end of this row,
bring the thread forward, knit two.

_Eighth row_--plain knitting.




IV.

Gothic Pattern.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by ten.--Knit four
plain rows.

_Fifth row_--knit one; bring the thread forward, knit three;(a) slip
one; knit two together, pass the slipped stitch over them; knit three;
bring the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread forward, knit
three.--Repeat from (a).

_Sixth row_--pearl knitting.

Repeat the fifth and sixth rows three times, and commence again with the
four plain rows.




V.

Scotch Pattern.


Cast on seven stitches for each pattern.

_First row_--knit two; knit two together; bring the thread forward, knit
one; bring the thread forward, knit two together.--Repeat.

_Second row_--plain knitting.

_Third row_--knit one;(a) knit two together; bring the thread forward,
knit three; bring the thread forward, knit two together.--Repeat from
(a).

_Fourth row_--plain knitting.

_Fifth row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit two together; knit
one; knit two together; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.

_Sixth row_--plain knitting.

_Seventh row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit two together;
knit one; knit two together; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.

_Eighth row_--plain knitting.

_Ninth row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit two together; knit
one; knit two together; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.

_Tenth row_--plain knitting.

_Eleventh row_--knit three; bring the thread forward, knit three
together; bring the thread forward, knit one.--Repeat.

_Twelfth row_--plain knitting.

_Thirteenth row_--knit three; knit two together; bring the thread
forward, knit three.--Repeat.

_Fourteenth row_--plain knitting.

Commence again, as at first row.




VI.

Chevron Pattern.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by eight.

_First row_--pearl knitting.

_Second row_--knit two together; knit three; bring the thread forward,
knit three.--Repeat.

Repeat these two rows twice,--making in all six rows.

The pattern, as above worked, turns to the left; in the next six rows it
should turn to the right,--this is to be done by bringing the thread
forward before the open stitch of the preceding row.

Commence again as at first row, knitting alternately six rows with the
pattern to the left, and six rows with the pattern to the right.




VII.

Vandyke Pattern.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by ten.

_First row_--pearl knitting.

_Second row_--plain knitting.

_Third row_--pearl knitting.

_Fourth row_--bring the thread forward, knit two; knit two together;
pearl one; knit two together; knit two; bring the thread forward, knit
one.--Repeat.

Commence again, as at first row.




VIII.

Lace Pattern.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by six.

_First row_--knit one; knit two together; bring the thread forward, knit
one; bring the thread forward, knit two together.--Repeat.

_Second row_--pearl knitting.

Repeat the two first rows, four times,--making altogether ten rows.

_Eleventh row_--knit two together;(a) bring the thread forward, knit
three; bring the thread forward, knit three in one, (by slipping the
first stitch, knitting the second, and passing the slip-stitch over the
knitted one; then passing the last stitch off the right hand needle on
to the left hand needle, and slipping the second stitch over the first,
and passing the stitch back again on to the right-hand needle).--Repeat
from (a).

_Twelfth row_--pearl knitting.

_Thirteenth row_--knit one; bring the thread forward, knit two together;
knit one; knit two together; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.--Finish
this row by bringing the thread forward, and knitting two together, to
prevent its decreasing.

_Fourteenth row_--pearl knitting.

Repeat the two last rows four times.

_Twenty-third row_--knit two;(b) bring the thread forward, knit three in
one (as before); bring the thread forward, knit three.--Repeat from (b).

Commence again, as at first row.




IX.

Fish-bone Pattern.


Cast on any uneven number of stitches.

_First row_--Slip one; knit one;(a) bring the thread forward, slip one,
taking it in front; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; knit
two.--Repeat from (a).--There will be three plain stitches to knit at
the end of the row.

_Second row_--Slip one;(b) turn the thread round the needle, and bring
it in front again; pearl two together; pearl two.--Repeat from (b).




X.

German Pattern.


Cast on twenty-one stitches for each pattern.

_First row_--pearl knitting.

_Second row_--knit two together; knit three; knit two together; knit
one; bring the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread forward, knit
one; knit two together; knit three; knit two together; knit one; bring
the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread forward, knit
two.--Repeat.

_Third row_--pearl knitting.

_Fourth row_--knit two together; knit one; knit two together; knit one;
bring the thread forward, knit three; bring the thread forward, knit
one; knit two together; knit one; knit two together; knit one; bring the
thread forward, knit three; bring the thread forward, knit two.--Repeat.

_Fifth row_--pearl knitting.

_Sixth row_--slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over
them; knit one; bring the thread forward, knit five; bring the thread
forward, knit one; slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch
over them; knit one; bring the thread forward, knit five; bring the
thread forward, knit two.--Repeat.

_Seventh row_--pearl knitting.

_Eighth row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit one; bring the
thread forward, knit one; knit two together; knit three; knit two
together; knit one; bring the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread
forward, knit one; knit two together; knit three; knit two
together--Repeat.

_Ninth row_--pearl knitting.

_Tenth row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit three; bring the
thread forward, knit one; knit two together; knit one; knit two
together; knit one; bring the thread forward, knit three; bring the
thread forward, knit one; knit two together; knit one; knit two
together.--Repeat.

_Eleventh row_--pearl knitting.

_Twelfth row_--knit two; bring the thread forward, knit five; bring the
thread forward, knit one; slip one; knit two together, pass the
slip-stitch over them; knit one; bring the thread forward, knit five;
bring the thread forward, knit one; slip one; knit two together, pass
the slip-stitch over them.--Repeat.

Commence again, as at first row.




XI.

Diamond Pattern.


Cast on eight stitches for each pattern.

_First row_--bring the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread
forward, knit two together; knit three; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Second row_--pearl knitting.

_Third row_--bring the thread forward, knit three; bring the thread
forward, knit two together; knit one; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Fourth row_--pearl knitting.

_Fifth row_--bring the thread forward, knit five; bring the thread
forward, slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over
them.--Repeat.

_Sixth row_--pearl knitting.

_Seventh row_--knit two together; knit three; knit two together; bring
the thread forward, knit one; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.

_Eighth row_--pearl knitting.

_Ninth row_--knit two together; knit one; knit two together; bring the
thread forward, knit three; bring the thread forward.--Repeat.

_Tenth row_--pearl knitting.

_Eleventh row_--bring the thread forward, knit three; bring the thread
forward, knit two together; knit one; knit two together.--Repeat.

Commence again, from fourth row.




XII.

Shell Pattern.


Cast on twenty-five stitches for each pattern.

_First row_--knit two together, four times; bring the thread forward,
knit one, eight times; knit two together, four times; pearl
one.--Repeat.

_Second row_--pearl knitting.

_Third row_--plain knitting.

_Fourth row_--pearl knitting.

Commence again, as at first row.




Cable Knitting.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by six, in German
wool--No. 18 needles.

_First row_--pearl knitting.

_Second row_--plain knitting.

_Third row_--pearl knitting.

_Fourth row_--plain knitting.

_Fifth row_--pearl knitting.

_Sixth row_--plain knitting.

_Seventh row_--pearl knitting.

_Eighth row_--Slip three stitches on to a third needle, always keeping
that needle in front; knit the next three stitches; then knit the three
stitches that were slipped on the third needle; take the third needle
again, and slip three more stitches on it, keeping it as before in
front, and knit the next three stitches; then knit the three stitches
slipped on the third needle; continue the same to the end of the row.

Commence again, as at first row.




A Purse.


Cast on one hundred stitches.--No. 20 needles.

_First row_--slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; bring the
silk forward, knit one; bring the silk forward, pearl one.--Repeat to
the end of the row.

Every succeeding row is the same.

Three skeins of coarse netting silk are required. It forms a strong
gentleman's purse.




Pretty Stitch for a Purse.


Cast on any even number of stitches, with middle-sized netting
silk.--No. 22 needles.

_First row_--plain knitting.

_Second row_--knit two together.--The first and last stitches in this
row are to be knitted plain.

_Third row_--make one between each stitch, by taking up the silk between
the stitches of the preceding row, except between the two last stitches.

_Fourth row_--plain knitting.

_Fifth row_--pearl knitting.

Repeat from second row.




A Pence Jug, or Purse.


Five needles, No. 20, with claret and green German wool.

Commence with the _handle_;--by casting on four stitches in claret, and
knitting, in plain rows backwards and forwards, until it be two inches
long.

Cast on six stitches on the same needle, twenty-six on the second, and
ten on the third: then,--

Knit from the first needle,--knit two; pearl two; alternately.

With the second needle--pearl two; knit two; pearl two; pass the wool
back, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; knit the
remaining stitches plain, within seven of the end; then,--knit two
together; knit one; pearl two; knit two.

On the next needle--pearl two; knit two; alternately,--repeating three
rounds, until twelve stitches only remain on the second needle, which
finishes the _spout_.

Knit three rounds,--every two stitches, alternately pearled and plain.

    Knit five rounds--green    } every two stitches
    Knit three rounds--claret  } alternately pearled
    Knit five rounds--green    } and plain.

Knit one plain round, and pearl three rounds,--in claret.

Knit one plain round, bringing the wool forward between every two
stitches.

Pearl three rounds. Knit one plain round. In the next two rounds,--bring
the wool forward, knit two together. Then,--

Knit one plain round with claret; pearl three rounds; knit one plain
round; in the next two rounds, bring the wool forward and knit two
together; knit one plain round; pearl three rounds. Divide the stitches
on the four needles,--twelve on each. Then,--

In plain stocking knitting, knit five rounds, decreasing one
alternately, at each end, and in the middle of the needle. Knit three
rounds more, decreasing occasionally.

Divide the stitches on three needles; knit a plain round, and pearl
three rounds without decreasing; finish with plain rounds, decreasing
until only four stitches remain on each needle. Draw up the small
opening and attach the lower end of the handle to the side of the jug.

It may also be worked in silk.




A Strong Purse.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by three.--No. 22
needles.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, slip one; knit two, pass the
slip-stitch over them.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Second row_--plain knitting.

_Third row_--knit two, before the pattern is commenced, that the holes
may come in a diagonal direction.

_Fourth and Fifth rows_--same as second and third.

_Sixth row_--same as first.

This purse will take five skeins of second-sized netting silk. It
particularly requires stretching.




A pretty open Stitch for a Purse.


Four skeins of fine purse-silk, and four needles, No. 23, will be
required.

Cast on twenty stitches on each of three needles.

_First round_--plain knitting.

_Second round_--bring the silk forward, knit two together.

Repeat the above two rounds four times.

_Eleventh round_--plain knitting.--Pass the last stitch of this round,
after it is knitted, on to the next needle.

_Twelfth round_--commence by knitting two together, before bringing the
silk forward;--this change causes the pattern to assume a kind of
vandyke form. Pass the last stitch of each needle of this round, on to
the next needle.

Repeat the two last rounds four times;--commence again as at first
round, working alternately the ten rounds of each pattern, until the
opening of the purse be required to be made; this is to be worked in
rows backwards and forwards, like the first ten rounds, in order to keep
the edges even. The other end is then to be made like the first.




Open Stitch Purse with Beads.


Second-size purse twist, and needles No. 20, are required.

Cast on sixty stitches in netting silk.

_First row_--knit one; bring the silk forward, knit two together; bring
the silk forward, pass on a bead, placing it behind the needle; knit two
together.--Continue the same to the end of the row, placing a bead every
alternate pattern.

_Second row_--same as the first, without beads.

_Third row_--knit one; bring the silk forward, pass on a bead;
then,--continue as in first row.




A Purse in fine Silk.


Cast on three stitches, for each pattern.--No. 23 needles.

_First row_--bring the silk forward, knit two together; knit
one.--Repeat.

_Second row_--bring the silk forward, pearl two together; pearl
one.--Repeat.




Herringbone, or Shetland Stitch for a Purse.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by four.--No. 20
needles. About eighty stitches will be required.

_First row_--bring the silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the
slip-stitch over it; knit one; bring the silk forward, pearl
one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

Every row is the same.

Three skeins of second-sized silk will be required.




THE FIVE FOLLOWING PATTERNS WILL BE FOUND VERY PRETTY FOR BAGS;--THEY
SHOULD BE KNITTED WITH SECOND-SIZED PURSE TWIST,--NO. 24 NEEDLES.




I.

Diagonal Check Pattern Bag.


Cast on eight stitches for each pattern.

_First round_--pearl one; bring the silk forward, slip one; knit one,
pass the slip-stitch over it; knit four; pearl one.--Repeat.

_Second round_--pearl one; knit six; pearl one.--Repeat.

_Third round_--pearl one; knit one; bring the silk forward, slip one;
knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; knit three; pearl one.--Repeat.

_Fourth round_--Repeat the second.

_Fifth round_--pearl one; knit two; bring the silk forward, slip one;
knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; knit two; pearl one.--Repeat.

_Sixth round_--Repeat the second.

_Seventh round_--pearl one; knit three; bring the silk forward, slip
one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; knit one; pearl
one.--Repeat.

_Eighth round_--Repeat the second.

Commence again, as at first row.




II.

Lozenge pattern Bag.


Cast on thirteen stitches for each pattern.

_First round_--pearl two; knit four; bring the silk forward, slip one;
knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over them; bring the silk
forward, knit four.--Repeat.

_Second round_--pearl two; knit two; knit two together; bring the silk
forward, knit three; bring the silk forward, knit two together, taken at
the back.--Repeat.

_Third round_--pearl two; knit one; knit two together; bring the silk
forward, knit five; bring the silk forward, knit two together, taken at
the back; knit one.--Repeat.

_Fourth round_--pearl two; knit two together; bring the silk forward,
knit three; bring the silk forward, knit two together; knit two; bring
the silk forward, knit two together, taken at the back.--Repeat.

_Fifth round_--pearl two; knit two; bring the silk forward, knit two
together, taken at the back; knit three; knit two together; bring the
silk forward, knit two.--Repeat.

_Sixth round_--pearl two; knit three; bring the silk forward, knit two
together, taken at the back; knit one; knit two together; bring the silk
forward, knit three.--Repeat.

Commence again, as at first row.




III.

Hem-stitch Pattern Bag.


Cast on thirteen stitches for each pattern.

_First round_--knit two; bring the silk forward, knit two together;
knit one; bring the silk forward, knit two together; pearl one; bring
the silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it;
pearl three.--Repeat.

_Second round_--knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit one;
knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit two; pearl two; bring
the silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip stitch over it;
pearl two.--Repeat.

_Third round_--knit two; bring the silk forward, knit two together; knit
one; bring the silk forward, knit two together; pearl three; bring the
silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; pearl
one.--Repeat.

_Fourth round_--knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit one;
knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit two; pearl four; bring
the silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over
it.--Repeat.

_Fifth round_--knit two; bring the silk forward, knit two together; knit
one; bring the silk forward, knit two together; pearl six.--Repeat.

_Sixth round_--knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit one; knit
two together; bring the silk forward, knit two; pearl one; bring the
silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it; pearl
three.--Repeat.

_Seventh round_--knit two; bring the silk forward, knit two together;
knit one; bring the silk forward, knit two together; pearl two; bring
the silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it;
pearl two.--Repeat.

_Eighth round_--knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit one;
knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit two; pearl three; bring
the silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it;
pearl one.--Repeat.

_Ninth round_--knit two; bring the silk forward, knit two together; knit
one; bring the silk forward, knit two together; pearl four; bring the
silk forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip-stitch over it.--Repeat.

_Tenth round_--knit two together; bring the silk forward, knit one; knit
two together; bring the silk forward, knit two; pearl six.--Repeat.

Commence again, as at first row.




IV.

Spider Pattern Bag.


Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by six.

_First round_--bring the silk forward, slip one; knit two together, pass
the slip-stitch over them; bring the silk forward, knit three.--Repeat.

_Second round_--plain knitting.

_Third round_--bring the silk forward, knit two together, twice; knit
two.--Repeat.

_Fourth round_--plain knitting.

_Fifth round_--bring the silk forward, knit three; bring the silk
forward, slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over
them.--Repeat.

Commence again, as at first round.




V.

Stripe Pattern Bag.


Cast on six stitches for each pattern.

_First round_--turn the silk round the needle, pearl three; bring the
silk forward, slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over
them.--Repeat.

_Second, Third, and Fourth rounds_--alternately pearl three and knit
three.

Commence again, as at first round.




A Bag, with Black or Garnet Beads.


No. 20 needles, eight skeins of netting silk, and four bunches of beads,
including those for the fringe, will be required.

Thread half a bunch of beads on a skein of claret netting silk, and
cast on eighty-eight stitches.

_First and second rows_--plain knitting, without beads.

_Third row_--slip one; knit one with a bead; knit one.--Repeat the same,
alternately, to the end of the row.

Repeat from first row, eighty-four times. Observe at the commencement of
every row to make a slip-stitch.

Join up the two sides, leaving an opening at the top, and finish with
two bars and a gold chain. A fringe of the garnet beads, with gold
points, is the prettiest trimming. It should have a stiff lining.




Knitted Fringe.


This may be made of any sized wool or cotton, according to the purpose
for which it is required; it may also be _spaced_ with two or more
colours, working alternately six rows in each.

Cast on eight stitches.

Knit two; bring the wool forward, knit two together; knit one; bring the
wool forward, knit two together; knit one.

When a sufficient number of rows are knitted to form the length of
fringe desired,--

Cast off five stitches, leaving three to unravel for the fringe.

With four-thread fleecy, No. 10 needles may be used.




Vandyke Border.


This border is generally knitted in cotton, and may be used for muslin
curtains, for knitted or netted fish napkins, and for "tidies" for the
backs of chairs, or ends of sofas.

Cast on seven stitches, on No. 17 needles.

_First and second rows_--plain knitting.

_Third row_--slip one; knit two; turn over, knit two together; turn
over twice, knit two together.

_Fourth row_--bring the thread forward, knit two; pearl one; knit two;
turn over, knit two together; knit one.

_Fifth row_--slip one; knit two; turn over, knit two together; knit
four.

_Sixth row_--knit six; turn over, knit two together; knit one.

_Seventh row_--slip one; knit two; turn over, knit two together; turn
over twice, knit two together; turn over twice, knit two together.

_Eighth row_--knit two; pearl one; knit two; pearl one; knit two; turn
over, knit two together; knit one.

_Ninth row_--slip one; knit two; turn over, knit two together; turn over
twice, knit two together; turn over twice, knit two together; turn over
twice, knit two together.

_Tenth row_--knit two; pearl one; knit two; pearl one; knit two; pearl
one; knit two; turn over, knit two together; knit one.

_Eleventh row_--slip one; knit two; turn over, knit two together; knit
nine.

_Twelfth row_--cast off all but seven; knit four; turn over, knit two
together; knit one.

This finishes the first vandyke.--Commence again, as at third row.




A warm Half-square Shawl.


Four-thread fleecy, or eight-thread Zephyr fleecy, of two colours, say
rose and white.--No. 8 needles.

Cast on one stitch, rose colour, and increase at the beginning of every
other row, until there are ten stitches on the needle. In the next
row--knit seven stitches for the border, which is throughout in plain
knitting; join on the white wool, and pearl three, increasing on the
last stitch.

In the next row--bring the wool forward, slip one; knit two, pass the
slipped stitch over them; knit the remaining white stitch plain; knit
the seven stitches for the border, twisting the two colours in the
changing of them.

In the next row--knit the seven stitches for the border; pearl the
white, increasing at the end as before.

Repeat the two last rows, which comprise the whole pattern, until the
shawl is of the required size, and finish with the plain knitted border,
to correspond with the other side.

N.B. In the fancy row of the white, when uneven stitches occur at the
end of the row, they are to be knitted plain.




A warm Double Knitted Scarf, in Two Colours.


Cast on thirty-six stitches in blue six-thread fleecy.--No. 2 needles.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, slip one; pass the wool back, knit
one, turning the wool twice round the needle.--Repeat to the end of the
row.

Each succeeding row is the same, observing that the knit-stitch always
comes over the slip-stitch.

It will require seven rows of blue, seven of white, seven of blue,
thirty-eight of white, seven of blue, seven of white, and seven of blue.

Cast off and draw up the ends. Finish with blue and white tassels.




A Border for a Shawl or Quilt.


This border should be knitted separate, with the same sized needles and
wool as the shawl or quilt, and afterwards sewn on.

Cast on any even number of stitches.

_First row_--Bring the wool forward, knit two together.

_Second row_--plain knitting.

Repeat these two rows alternately.




Raised Knitting for a Shawl.


Two No. 19 and one No. 13 needles should be used.

Cast on any even number of stitches, that may be required, with German
wool.

_First row_--with the small needle, alternately make one stitch, and
knit two stitches together.

_Second row_--plain knitting, with large needle.

_Third row_--plain knitting, with small needle.

_Fourth row_--pearl knitting, with small needle.

Repeat, from the first row.

This kind of knitting is also well adapted for hoods, muffs, cuffs, etc.
It is very pretty for a shawl in stripes,--knitting three patterns
alternately of each colour. For a shawl, one yard and a half square,
about three hundred and sixty stitches would be required.




A Russian Shawl, in Brioche Stitch.


German wool.--No. 9 needles.

For a shawl one yard and a half square, about three hundred and sixty
stitches will be required.--Five shades each, of two different colours,
turned back, with the lightest in the centre, knitting two rows of each
shade, look very well.--The following are good colours,--scarlet and
stone colour,--blue and brown,--lilac and red brown,--lilac and white.

The Brioche-stitch is simply--bring the wool forward, slip one; knit two
together.




A light Stitch for a Shawl.


Three-thread fleecy.--No. 10 needles.

Cast on any even number of stitches.--Bring the wool forward, knit two
together, alternately, to the end of the row. Every row is the same.




Star Pattern Shawl, in Two Colours.


Cast on four stitches in blue Zephyr wool, or four-thread fleecy.--No. 6
needles.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, knit one,--(these two stitches form
the increase, and therefore are _not_ to be _repeated_); bring the wool
forward, slip one; knit two, pass the slip-stitch over them.--Repeat the
same to the end of the row.

_Second row_--pearl knitting in claret.

_Third row_--the same as first,--in blue.

_Fourth row_--the same as second,--in claret.

Repeat these rows alternately, in blue and claret, until there are one
hundred and eighty stitches on the needle; cast off, and finish with a
netted fringe.

As the increasing adds an irregular stitch, some rows will have one, and
others two knitted stitches, at their commencement.




Barège Knitting for Shawls.


Commence with any number of stitches that may be divided by three.--No.
4 needles, finest _Lady Betty's_ wool.--Knit one plain row.

_Second row_--bring the wool forward, knit three; bring the wool
forward, knit three together, taking them off at the back.

_Third row_--pearl knitting.

_Fourth row_--bring the wool forward, knit three together, taking them
off at the back; bring the wool forward, knit three.

_Fifth row_--pearl knitting.

Repeat from the second row.

When a pattern, in one or more colours, is to be introduced, break off
the ground colour, and fasten on the colour next to be used, in the
following manner.--Having made a slip knot in the end of the wool, pass
it on the needle in the left hand: twist the end of the coloured wool
and that of the ground, together,--knit, in plain knitting, the
stitches required for the pattern, then fasten off, by making a loop,
and commence again with the ground colour,--fastening on again as above.
Any number of colours may thus be introduced, to form flowers or other
patterns, which, however, are always to be done in plain knitting.




A Shetland Knitted Scarf.


Commence with the pattern for the border, by casting on one hundred
stitches for the width of the scarf.--No. 7 needles, and four-thread
embroidery, or _Lady Betty's_ wool.

_First row_--knit two stitches together, four times; bring the wool
forward, knit one, eight times; knit two stitches together, four times;
pearl one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Second row_--pearl knitting.

_Third row_--plain knitting.

_Fourth row_--pearl knitting.

Repeat from the first row, until the pattern be about fourteen inches
deep. Commence the centre as follows:--working one row of pearl
knitting, before the pattern commences.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, slip one; knit one, pass the slip
stitch over it; knit one; pearl one.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Second and following rows_--repeat the first,--every row being alike.

If the wool be split, it exactly imitates the Shetland wool. In
splitting, the wool will frequently break; but this is not important, as
by laying the ends contrariwise, and twisting them together, a few
stitches may be so knit, that the joins are not perceptible.

Both ends of the scarf are to be made alike, by reversing the knitting
of the border. They may be finished with a tied, knitted, or netted
fringe, of the same wool, without splitting, or of fine German wool.




Shetland Pattern for a Shawl.


This should be worked in _Lady Betty's_ wool, or four-thread embroidery
fleecy, with No. 6 or 8 needles.

Cast on any number of stitches that may be divided by six.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, knit one; bring the wool forward,
knit one;--slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over them;
knit one.

_Second row_--pearl knitting.

_Third row_--bring the wool forward, knit three; bring the wool forward,
slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over them.

_Fourth row_--pearl knitting.

_Fifth row_--knit one; slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch
over them; knit one; bring the wool forward, knit one; bring the wool
forward.

_Sixth row_--pearl knitting.

_Seventh row_--slip one; knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over
them; bring the wool forward, knit three; bring the wool forward.

_Eighth row_--pearl knitting.

N.B. There are to be two plain stitches at the beginning and end of each
row, to form an edge.




Other Patterns for Shawls.


With fine Shetland, or _Lady Betty's_ wool, and No. 10 needles, most
beautiful shawls may be knitted from the Leaf and Trellis Pattern (page
36), Point Pattern (page 42), Scotch Pattern (page 44), or Lace Pattern
(page 47).




Double Diamond Stitch for a Quilt.


This is prettiest in stripes of about five inches in width, in any two
colours.

Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by three, allowing
two over, for a stitch at each end of the row.

_First row_--plain knitting.

_Second row_--slip one;(a) bring the wool forward, slip one; knit two
together.--Repeat from (a).--Plain knit the last stitch.

_Third row_--slip one; knit one; the next stitch is a double stitch
(that is,--a stitch and a loop)--knit the stitch and slip the
loop;--continue to knit the stitch and slip the loop, to the end of the
row.

_Fourth row_--commence again, as at second row.

In every other _second_ row, there will be a double stitch after the
first one,--this is to be knitted without bringing the wool forward. All
the other stitches are to be knitted the same as before.

N.B. The last stitch of every row is to be knitted plain.




A Quilt.


This may be knitted as a Baby's Quilt, or it may be done in small
squares for a large Quilt.--Eight-thread Zephyr fleecy.--No. 6 needles.

Cast on any number of stitches that can be divided by three,--for a
square of six inches, say forty-five; for a Baby's Quilt, two hundred
and thirty-one.

_First row_--slip one; knit two, taken together in the front;(a) turn
the wool round the needle, and bring it again in front; slip one; knit
two together.--Repeat from (a).

Every row is alike.

N.B. The two last stitches at the end of the row are to be--the first
pearled,--the second knitted.




A light and warm Counterpane.


Six-thread fleecy in two colours--say blue and white; or, what is
preferable, German quilt wool--Needles No. 2, pointed at both ends.

Cast on any number of stitches in blue.

_First row_--plain knitting, turning the wool twice round the needle.

_Second row_--join on the white wool, knit one; knit two together,
turning the wool twice round the needle;--continue knitting two
together, and turning the wool twice round the needle, to the end of the
row, but plain knit the last stitch.

_Third row_--commence at the other end of the needle; knit two stitches
taken together in front, twisting the wool twice round the needle.

_Fourth row_--white,--knit one; knit two together, turning the wool
twice round the needle; knit one.

_Fifth row_--commence again as at third row.




Cross Stitch Pattern for a Quilt.


Two colours,--say gold colour and white.--No. 3 needles, pointed at both
ends.--Cast on any number of stitches.

_First row_--white,--knit one plain stitch, turning the wool twice round
the needle.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Second row_--gold colour,--joining on the colour where the last row of
white commenced;--knit one plain stitch, turning the wool once round the
needle; knit the long stitch and the one that was knitted in the last
row together, turning the wool twice round the needle.--Repeat to the
end of the row,--when one stitch will be left, which is to be knitted
the same as the plain stitch at the beginning of the row.

_Third row_--white,--knit two together, taken in the front, turning the
wool twice round the needle.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Fourth row_--gold colour,--the same as the third,--knitting one plain
stitch at the commencement of the row, and one plain stitch at the end
of the row, twisting the wool once round the needle.

_Fifth row_--white,--knit two together, twisting the wool twice round
the needle.--Repeat to the end of the row.

_Sixth row_--Commence again, as at second row.

It may be as well to remark, that two rows are knitted at the back, and
two at the front.




Another Quilt.


This should be knitted in stripes of six inches in width.--Cast on any
number of stitches that may be divided by three;--German quilt
wool.--No. 1 needles.

_First row_--bring the wool forward, slip one; knit two, pass the
slip-stitch over them.--Repeat.

_Second row_--pearl knitting.

_Third row_--knit two, before the pattern is commenced, that the holes
may come in a diagonal direction.

_Fourth row_--pearl knitting.

_Fifth row_--same as third.




A Quilt, or Couvre-Pied, in squares.


This may be worked with Zephyr fleecy,--No. 9 needles, each piece being
about three and a half inches square. Every square is worked in two
colours,--as blue and white; lilac and white; gold colour and white;
green and white; etc. These pieces are afterwards to be joined together,
arranging them, according to their several colours. Each square,
however, if preferred, may be worked the same. The following directions
are for a square in green and white:--

_First row_--bring the wool forward, knit one,--in green. Work _five_
more _rows_, in the same manner, when there should be seven stitches on
the needle.

_Seventh row_--bring the wool forward, knit two,--in green; join on the
white,--knit three;--join on another length of green,--knit two.

_Eighth row_--bring the green wool forward, knit two; pearl three,
white; knit three, green.

_Ninth, and Tenth rows_--knit to the end of each row, with green,
increasing at the beginning, as before.

_Eleventh row_--bring the wool forward, knit two, green; knit seven,
white; knit two, green.

_Twelfth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two, green; pearl seven,
white; knit three, green.

_Thirteenth, and Fourteenth rows_--knit to the end of each row, with
green, increasing, as before.

_Fifteenth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two, green; knit eleven,
white; knit two, green.

_Sixteenth row_--bring the wool forward, knit two, green; pearl eleven,
white; knit three, green.

_Seventeenth, and Eighteenth rows_--same as thirteenth and
fourteenth.--There should now be nineteen stitches on the needle,--one
half of the square being completed. The decreasing then commences as
follows:--

_Nineteenth row_--slip one, knit two together, knit one, green; knit
eleven, white; knit four green.

_Twentieth row_--slip one, knit two together, knit one, green; pearl
eleven, white; knit three, green.

_Twenty-first, and twenty-second rows_--green--decreasing at the
beginning of each row.

_Twenty-third row_--slip one, knit two together, knit one, green; knit
seven, white; knit four, green.

_Twenty-fourth row_--slip one, knit two together, knit one, green; pearl
seven, white; knit three, green.

_Twenty-fifth, and twenty-sixth rows_--green,--decreasing, as before.

_Twenty-seventh row_--slip one, knit two together, knit one, green; knit
three, white; knit four, green.

_Twenty-eighth row_--slip one, knit two together, knit one, green; pearl
three, white; knit three, green.

The white is now done with. The square is to be finished with plain rows
of green,--decreasing, at the commencement of each.




A Cover for an Air Pillow.


Cast eighty stitches on each of three needles, No. 9.--Three-thread
fleecy.

_First round_--bring the wool forward, knit one.--Repeat.

_Second round_--slip one; knit one, pass the slip stitch over
it.--Repeat.

Repeat the first and second rounds, alternately.




A Baby's Hood.


Four-thread _Lady Betty's_ wool,--pink and white may be used. Eight
needles will be required, viz. four No. 25, two No. 18, and two, each
one inch in circumference.

Cast on eighty-two stitches, with pink, No. 18 needles,--knit four plain
rows.

    Knit four plain rows.              }
                                       }
    Bring the wool forward, knit two   }
    together.                          } white.
                                       }
    Knit three plain rows.             }

Repeat the last four rows, six times.--There will now be thirty-six rows
from the commencement.

Cast sixteen more stitches on the same needle, to form the piece at the
back.--Repeat six more rows of the pattern.--Knit two plain rows in
pink;--then, divide the stitches on three No. 25 needles, to form a
round,--as a commencement for the crown.

Knit _three_ plain _rounds._

_Fourth round_--bring the wool forward, knit two together.--Repeat.

_Fifth round_--knit two together; knit twelve.--Repeat.

_Sixth round_--knit two together; knit eleven.--Repeat.

_Seventh round_--knit two together; knit ten.--Repeat.

_Eighth round_--plain knitting.

_Ninth round_--bring the wool forward, knit two together.--Repeat.

_Tenth round_--knit nine; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Eleventh round_--knit eight; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Twelfth round_--knit seven; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Thirteenth round_--plain knitting.

_Fourteenth round_--bring the wool forward, knit two together.--Repeat.

_Fifteenth round_--knit two together; knit eight.--Repeat.

_Sixteenth round_--knit two together; knit seven.--Repeat.

_Seventeenth round_--knit two together; knit six.--Repeat.

_Eighteenth round_--plain knitting.

_Nineteenth round_--bring the wool forward, knit two together.--Repeat.

_Twentieth round_--knit eight; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Twenty-first round_--knit seven; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Twenty-second round_--knit six; knit two together.--Repeat.

_Twenty-third round_--plain knitting.

_Twenty-fourth round_--bring the wool forward, knit two
together.--Repeat.

_Twenty-fifth round_--knit two together; knit five.--Repeat.

_Twenty-sixth round_--knit two together; knit four.--Repeat.

_Twenty-seventh round_--knit two together; knit three.--Repeat.

_Twenty-eighth round_--plain knitting.

The crown is now finished; it is to be drawn up with a needle and wool.

The opening at the back must be sewn up; and a band, corresponding with
the plain knitting in front, is to be formed by raising fifty-six
stitches in pink, and knitting three plain rows, with the No. 18
needles. Then, with white, cast sixteen stitches on the same needle, and
knit seventy-two stitches; cast on sixteen stitches, and knit three rows
of eighty-eight stitches. In the next row,--bring the wool forward, knit
two together. Knit six plain rows.

With the large needles, form the ruff, by knitting two rows in white,
and two in pink; then, work twenty-two rows--knitting four rows in
white, and two in pink, alternately. Cast off, and sew it, so as to form
a very loose double ruff round the throat.

For the front of the hood, raise eighty-two stitches, and, with the No.
18 needles, knit one plain row. Then, with the large needles,--knit two
plain rows in white; two in pink; and four in white. Cast off.--This,
when sewn double, finishes the borders of the hood. It is to be drawn,
with ribbon, at the back and front.




A Baby's Sock.


Cast on twenty-eight stitches in _pink_ German wool.--No. 19 needles.

Knit six turns, increasing a stitch at each row, to form the toe and
heel.

Knit six more turns, increasing a stitch at one end only, for the toe.

Cast off thirty stitches on another needle;--knit the remaining sixteen
stitches, for eighteen turns, and cast them off on another needle.

With _white_,--pick up the thirty pink stitches;--knit three plain
rows;--in the next row, bring the wool forward, knit two together.

Knit three plain rows; leave sixteen stitches on the needle, and repeat
the pattern in white, across the instep, seven times, which is
afterwards to be sewn to the pink knitting for the toe.

Cast on sixteen stitches in white,--to correspond with the other side.

Knit two plain rows;--in the next, bring the wool forward, knit two
together,--the whole length of the row;--knit one plain row in pink,
taking up the stitches that were cast off for the toe. This side of the
shoe is to be made to correspond with the other, by decreasing instead
of increasing.--The shoe and the white in the instep will now be
finished.

Pick up the stitches both of the shoe and instep;--knit three plain
turns. Take a larger needle,--bring the wool forward, knit two together,
forming the holes to pass the ribbon through.

Knit three plain turns with the small needle. In the next row, bring the
wool forward, knit two together.

Knit three plain rows. In the next,--bring the wool forward, knit two
together; repeat the same, until the sock be of the height
desired.--Cast off very loosely.




Another Baby's Sock.


Four-thread fleecy, or four-thread _Lady Betty's_ wool.--No. 11 needles.

Cast on twenty-six stitches.

_First row_--pearl two; knit two; alternately, to the end of the row.

_Second row_--knit two; pearl two.

_Third row_--Pearl two; knit two.

_Fourth row_--Pearl knitting.

Repeat the above four rows, twelve times,--making altogether fifty-two
rows--but, in the fifty-second row, pearl fourteen stitches only, and
cast off the remaining twelve stitches. Then,--

Raise fourteen stitches, pearling them at the same time, at the
commenced end, leaving twelve, to correspond with those cast off at the
other end. Repeat the four rows, as before, three times,--making in all
twelve rows. Fasten off, by drawing up these stitches with a needle and
wool, to form the toe, and sew up the shoe at the sole.

Twenty-seven stitches are now to be raised at the top of the shoe, round
the leg; then,--alternately pearl one row, and knit one row, for five
rows, and cast off.--This forms a finish to the top. The shoe is to be
laced across with ribbon.




A Baby's Stocking.


Cast on twenty-three stitches in brown,--No. 18 needles, and knit six
turns,--increasing one stitch at each end, for the toe and heel.

Knit six turns, increasing one stitch only, at the toe. There will now
be forty-one stitches on the needle. Cast off twenty-five stitches, and
knit the remaining sixteen stitches, for eighteen turns. One side of the
shoe and instep will now be made.

Cast on twenty-five stitches, and work the other side of the shoe to
correspond.

Pick up the stitches, with white, across the instep. Knit two turns,
catching in one loop of the sides of the shoe, in each row, to join them
together.

Knit one turn in brown; two in white; one in brown; two in white; and
one in brown.--The shoe and instep will now be finished.

Pick up the stitches of the shoe, on each side of the piece which forms
the instep. There should now be forty stitches on the needle.

Knit seven turns in white; then, eighteen turns, increasing a stitch at
the beginning and end of every other turn. Knit three plain turns; then
eighteen turns,--decreasing one stitch in every other turn, at the
beginning and end.

Forty stitches will now be found on the needle. Knit and pearl two,
alternately, for five turns. Knit two plain rows. Knit one row in red;
then, cast off loosely.

The shoe is to be sewn up into its shape, and the stocking closed up.




A Carriage Boot.


Two colours,--say blue and claret,--four, or six-thread fleecy,--Needles
No. 6.

Cast seventeen stitches on each of three needles, with claret; pearl six
rounds, knit five rounds.--Then,--

With blue,--knit one round, pearl one round, alternately, for six
rounds.

With claret,--repeat the last six rounds.

Repeat the two last stripes, twice. Then,--

From the first needle,--knit fourteen stitches, with claret; join on the
blue; knit twenty-three, leaving fourteen stitches (claret),
corresponding with the other side, on the third needle; then, turn back
and knit five rows, slipping the first stitch at the commencement of
each row.

Repeat the last stripe, three times; first--with claret, second--with
blue, third--with claret.

In the next three stripes of the alternate colours, knit two together at
the commencement, and end, of every third row. Then,--knit one stripe
(claret), knitting two together at the commencement of each row. Cast
off.--This finishes the front of the boot.

Commence again at the fourteen claret stitches that were left on the
first needle,--knit these, and cast on another thirty-six stitches in
claret; knit six plain rows.--In the next row, knit two together, at the
commencement. Knit nine more rows, knitting two together at the
commencement of every other row.--In the next four rows,--knit two
together at the commencement of each row.--This completes the first half
of the foot.

Knit the fourteen remaining stitches on the third needle, casting on
thirty-six stitches, as before, and finish the other half of the foot in
the same manner.

The two halves of the foot are then to be sewn together, and the foot
sewn to the front of the boot.




A double-knitted Night-Sock.


Cast on eighty-eight stitches in white, four or six-thread fleecy.--No.
3 needles.

N.B. In every row the first stitch is to be slipped;--the last stitch is
to be plain knitted.

_First row_--plain knitting.

_Second row_--knit one, pass the wool forward; slip one, pass the wool
back.--Repeat.

Repeat the second row, twenty-eight times.

_Thirty-first row_--knit sixty-two stitches, the same as second row;
then,--knit two together, to the end of the row.

_Thirty-second row_--cast off twenty-five stitches; knit thirty-eight
stitches, same as second row; cast off remaining twenty-five stitches.

Knit nineteen rows, the same as second row.

_Fifty-second row_--slip one; knit two together; knit fourteen stitches,
the same as second row; knit two together; knit the remaining stitches,
the same as second row.

_Fifty-third row_--repeat the last.

_Fifty-fourth row_--slip one; knit two together; knit the remaining
stitches, the same as second row.

Repeat the last row, seven times.

_Sixty-second row_--slip one; knit two together; knit eight stitches,
the same as second row; knit two together; knit the remaining stitches,
the same as second row.

_Sixty-third row_--repeat the last.

Knit three rows, the same as second row.

Draw up the stitches for the toe, and sew up the back and front.




A Frileuse or Neck Tippet.


Cast on thirty stitches, with double German wool.--Needles, one inch and
three quarters in circumference.

Plain knit thirty rows, slipping the first stitch of every row.--Cast
off loosely.

Tie with cords and small tassels.




Wheel pattern for Tidies, etc.


_Flax knitting thread_, No. 10.--Needles, No. 18. Cast on any number of
stitches that can be divided by ten.

_First row_--knit one; bring the thread forward, knit three; slip one;
knit two together, pass the slip-stitch over them; knit three; bring the
thread forward.--Repeat.

_Second row_--plain knitting.

Repeat these two rows, alternately.




Knitted Coral.


Cast on four stitches, with fine flat scarlet worsted braid, No. 19
needles.

Plain knitting, but slipping the first stitch of every row.




Hints on Knitting.


A plain stitch at the beginning of each row, commonly called an _edge
stitch_, is a great improvement in most instances, as it makes an
uniform edge, and the pattern is kept more even at its commencement. In
most knitting, the edge-stitch is slipped.

It is easiest to learn to knit, by holding the wool over the fingers of
the left hand; the position of the hands is more graceful when thus
held.

It is always advisable to cast off loosely.

When it is requisite to cast off, and continue the row on a separate
needle, it is sometimes better to run a coarse silk through the cast off
stitches; they are easily taken up, when required, and the inconvenience
of the idle needle is avoided.

In knitting, when a pattern is spoken of, it means as many rows as form
the pattern.


THE END.




_Just published, in post 8vo. elegantly bound, price 10s. 6d. carefully
revised, and considerably enlarged, with additional Woodcuts of
Patterns, etc._

    The Third Edition

    OF THE

    HAND-BOOK OF NEEDLEWORK,

    BEING A COMPLETE GUIDE TO EVERY KIND OF DECORATIVE
    NEEDLEWORK, CROCHET, KNITTING, AND NETTING,
    WITH A BRIEF HISTORICAL ACCOUNT
    OF EACH ART.

    BY

    MISS LAMBERT.


Contents:

CHAP.

    I. Introduction.
    II. Tapestry.
    III. Materials in General.
    IV. Wool.
    V. Silk.
    VI. Gold and Silver.
    VII. Chenille, Braid, etc.
    VIII. Canvas.
    IX. Berlin Patterns.
    X. Implements.
    XI. Drawing Patterns for Embroidery, Braiding, etc.
    XII. Framing Work.
    XIII. Embroidery.
    XIV. Stitches.
    XV. Canvas Work.
    XVI. Braiding and Appliqué.
    XVII. Bead Work.
    XVIII. Crochet.
    XIX. Knitting.
    XX. Netting.
    XXI. Needlework of the English Queens and Princesses.
    XXII. "The Praise of the Needle."

WITH ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN ILLUSTRATIVE ENGRAVINGS ON WOOD, OF
PATTERNS, IMPLEMENTS, ETC.


CRITICAL NOTICES OF THE WORK.

"One of Mr. MURRAY'S series of Handbooks, which seem destined to embrace
all the arts of life as well as all the sights in the world. Miss
LAMBERT'S treatise is one of practical utility, its information being
the product of experience: after sketching the history of needlework, it
proceeds to describe the various kinds of materials used, such as wool,
silk, gold thread, beads, &c.; the canvas, patterns, frames, and
implements, required; the different kinds of stitches; the mode of
working certain patterns and shapes; the processes of embroidery,
knitting, and netting. The volume is very handsomely got up, and
illustrated profusely with wood-cuts; nothing seems wanting to its
completeness."--_Spectator._

"We venture to recommend it as containing a great deal of practical
information respecting embroidery, frame work, knitting, netting,
braiding, bead work, and other profound mysteries, of which we, of the
uglier sex, know nothing.... We soon became interested in the historical
portion, which is gracefully and well written--so that the work is a
good book, instructive when the party consulting it desires instruction,
and amusing whenever she is weary of work. MISS LAMBERT observes in her
Preface, that she has endeavoured, and we will add successfully, 'to
embrace those subjects which appeared most worthy of notice in a
Treatise on Decorative Needlework, and by combining a brief historical
sketch, with a detailed account of the practice of each department, to
render them more generally interesting than a mere manual of directions
and examples.'"--_Athenæum._

"This is the most curious, complete, and erudite treatise on the art of
needlework that has, probably, ever been compiled.... The variety,
fulness, and systematic arrangement of the book, not to say one word
about its numerous engravings, and the remarkably elegant style in which
it is 'gotten up,' demand unmixed applause."--_Atlas._

"A very elegant and useful work. The directions how to ply the needle
are plain and easy of comprehension, and the plates which accompany the
letterpress and illustrate the designs, will be found of great
assistance to the ready acquirement of the art and its numerous
principles. The ample instructions for drawing patterns, purchasing
implements, framing, and properly finishing work, will be found not the
least available portion of the book."--_Literary Gazette._

"An eminently practical work; clear in its explanation, precise in its
directions, natural in its arrangements. The style is simple and easy;
the collateral information abundant. Its value is enhanced by historical
notices, which have been prepared with judgment and knowledge, and are
not disfigured by the slightest affectation."--_Polytechnic Review._

"The first edition of MISS LAMBERT'S 'HAND-BOOK' has been entirely sold
off, a better proof of its excellence than aught we could say in its
behalf; and a second edition has just appeared with an embossed cover,
which will render it an ornament to the drawing-room table, as well as
an object of utility from the nature of its contents. To this edition
several new patterns and engravings have been added, and additional
directions for crochet, knitting, netting, &c."--_Morning Post._

"The authoress seems to be thoroughly mistress of her craft, and has
produced not only a very instructive, but a very amusing volume upon a
branch of the fine arts now become again so fashionable.... A more
elegant or entertaining volume can scarcely be found on a drawing-room
table."--_Globe._

"This is a pleasant book, a good book, and a book worthy to be bought by
mothers and daughters, and studied, _con amore_, in quiet parlours and
snug nurseries. It is well produced. Its knowledge is practical, as a
few extracts, which may be of advantage to our readers, will best
show."--_Pictorial Times._

"Replete with excellent _practical_ information, clear and concise rules
for acquiring a knowledge of all the varied branches of the art,
illustrated by a series of beautifully executed designs, representing
implements, patterns, material, and numerous articles of modern
fancy-work, eminently calculated to initiate the unlearned (aye, and
learned too) in all the mysteries of tent-stitch, embroideries, braid,
appliqué, bead, chenille, canvas, and Berlin work, &c. In short, the
work justifies its title; it possesses an elegant exterior, and we
prognosticate that few ladies will willingly dispense with so much
silent instruction."--_Sunday Times._

"The pretty volume now before us, has been compiled with exceeding care,
and strict attention to the most minute details; all is
well-arranged.... The illustrations are a valuable addition to the
interest and information of a volume which deserves a place on the table
of every lady."--_Art Union._

"A new and carefully revised edition of this very elegant work is here
presented to us, and we do not hesitate to assure our fair readers, that
they will find it highly deserving of a place on the boudoir and
drawing-room tables. The volume, we should premise, is exclusively
devoted to ornamental needlework, and will be found as interesting as
it is useful, for, in addition to very clear and accurate instructions
for acquiring a proficiency in every branch of the art, it contains an
historical notice of its cultivation from the earliest ages."--_Court
Journal._

"This 'HAND-BOOK' cannot fail to assist the best taste; _utile et dulce_
have been carefully blended, and the descriptive letter-press has
evidently been given by a well-informed mind."--_Court Gazette._

"This elegantly printed volume contains a complete encyclopædia of
information for the fair votaries of the needle. The various mysteries
of tapestry work, embroidery-work, and so forth, are fully laid open,
with a clearness of statement, and completeness of direction, which
leave nothing to desire."--_Illustrated London News._

LONDON:

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

Richards, Printer, 100, St. Martin's Lane.




THE LADIES' LIBRARY,
OF
RURAL HOUSEHOLD ECONOMY.

_The following Volumes are now Published:_

VOL. 1.--GARDENING,

    With a Calendar of Practical Operations and Directions for every
    Month in the Year. By MRS. LOUDON. With Illustrative Woodcuts.
    _Sixth Edition_. Fcap. 8vo., 6s.

VOL. 2.--MODERN BOTANY;

    Or, a popular Introduction to the Natural System and Classification
    of Plants. By MRS. LOUDON. With One Hundred and Fifty Illustrations.
    Fcap. 8vo., 8s.

VOL. 3.--FARMING;

    Or, Plain Directions for Rearing all sorts of Domestic Poultry; with
    the best mode of Managing the Dairy and Piggery, together with
    useful Hints on the Rural Economy of small Families. By Author of
    "British Husbandry." With Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo.

VOL. 4.--DOMESTIC COOKERY,

    Suited to the present advanced state of the Art, but founded upon
    Principles of Economy and Practical Knowledge, and adapted for the
    use of Private Families. By MRS. RUNDELL. _Sixty-fifth Edition._
    Improved by the addition of Nine Hundred New Receipts, and a Chapter
    on Indian Cookery. Fcap. 8vo., 6s.

    _Of this Volume upwards of 280,000 copies have been sold._

VOL. 5.--FAMILY RECEIPTS;

    A Collection of more than a Thousand valuable Receipts in various
    Branches of Domestic Economy. _New Edition._ Fcap. 8vo. 5s. 6d.

VOL. 6.--VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY.

    By MRS. LOUDON. With numerous Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo. (_Just
    ready._)

_Each Volume is strongly Bound in Cloth, and may be
purchased separately._

                                                    [TURN OVER.




ELEMENTARY WORKS FOR YOUNG PERSONS.


I.

MRS. MARKHAM'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND, from the First Invasion by the
Romans, to the end of the Reign of William the Fourth, with
Conversations at the end of each Chapter. _Tenth Edition_, with numerous
Woodcuts. 2 vols. 12mo. 12s.


II.

MRS. MARKHAM'S HISTORY OF FRANCE, from the Conquest of Gaul by Julius
Cæsar, to the Reign of Louis Philippe, with Conversations at the end of
each Chapter. _Fifth Edition_, with numerous Woodcuts. 2 vols. 12mo.
12s.


III.

BERTHA'S JOURNAL DURING A VISIT TO HER UNCLE IN ENGLAND; with a variety
of Interesting and Instructive Information. _Fifth Edition._ 12mo. 7s.
6d.


IV.

CONVERSATIONS ON NATURE AND ART, for the Information and Amusement of
Young Persons. By a LADY. 2 vols. 12mo. 6s. 6d. each.


V.

PHILOSOPHY IN SPORT MADE SCIENCE IN EARNEST; or the First Principles of
Natural Philosophy inculcated by Aid of the Ordinary Toys and Sports of
Youth. _Fifth Edition._ With 100 Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 8s.


VI.

SENTENCES FROM THE PROVERBS, in English, French, Italian, and German.
For the daily Use of Young Persons. By a LADY. 16mo. 3s. 6d.


VII.

LETTERS FROM ITALY TO A YOUNGER SISTER. With Sketches of History,
Literature, and Art. By CATHERINE TAYLOR. _Second Edition._ 2 vols.
12mo. 17s.


VIII.

LITTLE ARTHUR'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. By LADY CALLCOTT. _Sixth Edition._
18mo. 3s.


IX.

STORIES FROM THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND FOR CHILDREN. _Thirteenth Edition._
18mo. 3s.


X.

PROGRESSIVE GEOGRAPHY FOR CHILDREN. By the Author of "Stories for
Children." _Third Edition._ 12mo. 2s.


XI.

GOSPEL STORIES FOR CHILDREN. An attempt to render the chief Events of
the Life of Our Saviour intelligent and profitable to Young Children.
_Second Edition._ 18mo. 3s. 6d.


XII.

YEAR BOOK OF NATURAL HISTORY, arranged for Each Month. By MRS. LOUDON.
With 40 Woodcuts. 18mo. 4s.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note:

The following printer's errors have been corrected in the text:

netting needle gauge
  "guage" printed for "gauge" in original

A Brioche[A].
  missing footnote marker added

_Fourth row_--with claret,--bring the wool forward, slip one; pass the
wool back, knit one.--Repeat to the end of the row.
  "on" printed for "one" in original

knit one, pass the slip-stitch
over it; pearl one.--Repeat.
  "slip-stich" printed for "slip-stitch" in original

Knit nineteen rows, the same as second row.
  "twenty" in original, needs to be nineteen to fit into pattern





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Knitting Book, by Miss Lambert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY KNITTING BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 33502-8.txt or 33502-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/0/33502/

Produced by Constanze Hofmann and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
