The Project Gutenberg EBook of Methods of Destroying Rats, by David Lantz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Methods of Destroying Rats
       Farmers' Bulletin 297

Author: David Lantz

Release Date: November 25, 2010 [EBook #34437]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK METHODS OF DESTROYING RATS ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net.








Issued May 31, 1907.

U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.

FARMERS' BULLETIN 297.

METHODS OF DESTROYING RATS.

BY

DAVID E. LANTZ,

_Assistant, Bureau of Biological Survey_.

[Illustration]

WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
1907.

[Transcriber's Note: Words surrounded by tildes, like ~this~ signifies
words in bold. Words surrounded by underscores, like _this_, signifies
words in italics.]




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.


U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
BUREAU OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY,
_Washington, D. C., May 15, 1901_.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith for publication Farmers'
Bulletin No. 297, containing concise directions for the destruction of
rats, prepared by David E. Lantz, an assistant in this Bureau. The
damage done by these rodents, both in cities and in the country, is
enormous, and the calls for practical methods of destroying them are
correspondingly numerous and urgent. It is believed that by following
the directions here given the numbers of this pest can be greatly
reduced and the losses from them proportionally diminished.

Respectfully,

C. HART MERRIAM,
_Chief, Biological Survey_.

HON. JAMES WILSON,
_Secretary of Agriculture_.




CONTENTS.
                               Page.

Introduction                      3

Methods of destroying rats        4

  Poisoning                       4
  Trapping                        5
  Use of ferrets and dogs         6
  Fumigation                      7

Rat-proof construction            7

Natural enemies of rats           8

Conclusions                       8




ILLUSTRATION.
                                            Page.

FIG. 1.--Method of baiting guillotine trap      6




METHODS OF DESTROYING RATS.


INTRODUCTION.

The brown or Norway rat (_Mus norvegicus_) is the worst mammal pest in
the United States, the losses from its depredations amounting to many
millions of dollars yearly--to more, indeed, than the losses from all
other injurious mammals combined.[A] In addition to its destructive
habits, this rat is now known to be an active agent in disseminating
infectious diseases, a fact which renders measures for its destruction
doubly important.

[Footnote A: Several species of rats are known as "house rats,"
including the black rat (_Mus rattus_), the roof rat (_Mus
alexandrinus_), and the brown rat (_Mus norvegicus_). Of these, the last
is the commonest and most widespread in this country. Not one of these
species is a native, but all were imported from the Old World. As their
habits in general are similar, the instructions given in the bulletin
apply alike to all.]

Introduced into America about the year 1775, the brown rat has
supplanted and nearly exterminated its less robust relative, the black
rat, and despite the incessant warfare of man has extended its range and
steadily increased in numbers. Its dominance is due to its great
fecundity and its ability to adapt itself to all sorts of conditions. It
breeds three or four times a year and produces from 6 to 12, and even
more, young at a litter. Young females breed when only 4 or 5 months
old. The species is practically omnivorous, feeding upon all kinds of
animal and vegetable matter. It makes its home in the open field, the
hedge row, and the river bank, as well as in stone walls, piers, and all
kinds of buildings. It destroys grains when newly planted, while
growing, and in the shock, stack, mow, crib, granary, mill, elevator, or
ship's hold, and also in the bin and feed trough. It invades store and
warehouse and destroys fur, laces, silks, carpets, leather goods, and
groceries. It attacks fruits, vegetables, and meats in the markets, and
destroys by pollution ten times as much as it actually eats. It carries
disease germs from house to house and bubonic plague from city to city.
It causes disastrous conflagrations; floods houses by gnawing lead water
pipes; ruins artificial ponds and embankments by burrowing; destroys
the farmers' pigs, eggs, and young poultry; eats the eggs and young of
song and game birds; and damages foundations, floors, doors, and
furnishings of dwellings.




METHODS OF DESTROYING RATS.


A compilation of all the methods of destroying rats practiced in
historic times would fill a volume. Unfortunately, the greater number of
them are worthless or impracticable. Few have more than temporary effect
upon their numbers, and even the best of them fail unless persistently
applied. Conditions vary so much that no one method of dealing with this
pest is applicable in all cases. Among the more important measures to be
recommended for actively combating the brown rat are: (1) Poisons; (2)
traps; (3) ferrets; (4) fumigation, and (5) rat-proof construction of
buildings.


POISONING.

~Barium Carbonate.~--One of the cheapest and most effective poisons for
rats and mice is barium carbonate, or barytes. This mineral has the
advantage of being without taste or smell; and, in the small quantities
used in poisoning rats and mice, is harmless to larger animals. Its
action on rodents is slow, but reasonably sure, and has the further
advantage that the animals before dying, if exit be possible, usually
leave the premises in search of water. Its employment in houses,
therefore, is rarely followed by the annoying odor which attends the use
of the more virulent poisons.

The poison may be fed in the form of a dough made of one-fifth barytes
and four-fifths meal, but a more convenient bait is ordinary oatmeal,
with about one-eighth of its bulk of barytes, mixed with water into a
stiff dough; or the barytes may be spread upon bread and butter or
moistened toast. The prepared bait should be placed in rat runs, a small
quantity at a place. If a single application of the poison fails to
drive all rats from the premises, it should be repeated with a change of
bait.

~Strychnine.~--Strychnine is a more virulent poison, but its action is so
rapid that the animals often die upon the premises, a circumstance which
prohibits its use in occupied dwellings. Elsewhere strychnine may be
employed with great success. Dry strychnine crystals may be inserted in
small pieces of raw meat, Vienna sausage, or toasted cheese, and these
placed in the rat runs; or oatmeal may be wet with a strychnine sirup,
and small quantities laid out in the same way.

Strychnine sirup is prepared as follows: Dissolve a half ounce of
strychnia sulphate in a pint of boiling water; add a pint of thick
sugar sirup and stir thoroughly. A smaller quantity of the poison may be
prepared with a proportional quantity of water. In preparing the bait it
is necessary that all the oatmeal should be moistened with sirup. Wheat
is the most convenient alternative bait. It should be soaked over night
in the strychnine sirup.

~Other Poisons.~--The two poisons most commonly used for rats and mice are
arsenic and phosphorus, nearly all commercial preparations containing
one or the other as a basis. While experiments prove that rats have
great powers of resistance to arsenic, it may sometimes be used
advantageously as an alternative poison. Preparations of phosphorus sold
by druggists are often too weak to be effective; and home-made mixtures,
when of sufficient strength, are dangerous, as rats may carry the baits
into walls or crannies and thus cause fires. For these and other reasons
the Biological Survey does not recommend preparations containing
phosphorus.

~Poison in the Poultry House.~--For poisoning rats in buildings and yards
occupied by poultry, the following method is recommended: Two wooden
boxes should be used, one considerably larger than the other, and each
having two or more holes in the sides large enough to admit rats. The
poisoned bait should be placed on the bottom and near the middle of the
larger box, and the smaller box should then be inverted over it. Rats
thus have free access to the bait, but fowls are excluded.


TRAPPING.

Trapping, if persistently followed, is one of the most effective methods
of destroying rats. The improved modern traps with a wire fall released
by a baited trigger and driven by a coiled spring have marked advantages
over the old forms, and many of them may be used at the same time. These
traps, sometimes called guillotine traps, are of many designs, but the
more simply constructed are to be preferred. Probably those made
entirely of metal are the best, as they are less likely to absorb and
retain odors.

In illustration of the effectiveness of traps, it may be related that a
year or two ago a large department store in Washington experienced heavy
losses of gloves, lace curtains, and other merchandise from rat
depredations. For several months the damages amounted to from $10 to $30
nightly. After many unsuccessful attempts to abate the nuisance the
managers were advised to try the improved traps. As a result 136 rats
were killed during the first twenty nights, when the losses practically
ceased, and the method has been continued in the store ever since with
satisfactory results.

Guillotine traps should be baited with small pieces of Vienna sausage
(Wienerwurst) or bacon. The trigger wire should be bent inward to bring
the bait into proper position to permit the fall to strike the rat in
the neck, as shown in the illustration (fig. 1).

Other excellent baits for rats are oatmeal, toasted cheese, toasted
bread (buttered), and sunflower or pumpkin seeds. When seed, grain, or
meal is used with a guillotine trap, it may be placed on the trigger
plate, or the trigger wire may be bent outward and the bait sprinkled
under it.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Method of baiting guillotine trap.]

Wire cage traps (French) also are useful for catching rats, but in the
long run the kinds recommended above are much more effective. While
trapping, all other food should be removed and the trap bait should be
changed often. Rats are very suspicious, and baits and traps should be
handled as little as possible. Increased success may be secured both in
trapping and poisoning if the rats are fed for a night or two with the
kinds of food to be used for bait.


USE OF FERRETS AND DOGS.

A ferret is useful for the purpose of driving rats out of burrows and
other hiding places so that dogs can capture them. An experienced person
with dogs and ferrets trained to work together can kill many rats when
they are numerous. But the amateur ferreter is likely to be greatly
disappointed.

In the rice fields of the far East the natives build numerous piles of
brush and rice straw and leave them for several days until many rats
have taken shelter in them. A portable bamboo inclosure several feet in
height is then set up around each pile in succession and the straw and
brush are thrown out over the top while dogs and men kill the trapped
rodents. Large numbers are killed in this way, and the plan with
modifications may be utilized in America with satisfactory results. A
wire netting of fine mesh may be used for the inclosure. The scheme is
applicable at the removal of grain, straw, or hay stacks, as well as
brush piles.


FUMIGATION.

Rats may be destroyed in their burrows in the fields, and, still more
important, in levees and rice-field dikes, by the use of carbon
bisulphid. A wad of cotton or other absorbent material is saturated with
the liquid and pushed into the burrow, the opening being packed with
soil to prevent escape of the gas. All animals in the burrow are
asphyxiated. Fumigation about buildings is not so effective, as the gas
can not readily be confined.




RAT-PROOF CONSTRUCTION.


The best way of excluding rats from buildings, whether in the city or
country, is by the use of cement in construction. As the advantages of
this material are coming to be generally understood, its use is rapidly
extending to all kinds of building. Dwellings, dairies, barns, stables,
chicken houses, ice houses, bridges, dams, silos, tanks, cisterns,
root-cellars, hotbeds, sidewalks, and curbs are now often made wholly of
concrete. In constructing dwelling houses the additional cost of making
the foundations rat-proof is slight as compared with the advantages. The
cellar walls should have concrete footings and the walls themselves be
laid in cement mortar. The cellar floor should be of "medium" rather
than "lean" concrete, and all water and drain pipes should be surrounded
with concrete. Even an old cellar may be made rat-proof at comparatively
small expense. Rat holes may be permanently closed by a mixture of
cement, sand, and broken glass or sharp bits of stone.

Rat-proof granaries, corncribs, and poultry houses may be constructed by
a liberal use of concrete in the foundations and floors.

Rats, mice, and sparrows may be excluded from corncribs by the use of
either an inner or an outer covering of fine-mesh wire netting
sufficiently heavy to resist the teeth of rats.

The common custom of setting corncribs upon posts with inverted pans at
the top often fails because the posts are not long enough to insure that
the lower cracks of the structure are beyond jumping reach of rats. The
posts should project at least 3 feet above the surface of the ground.




NATURAL ENEMIES OF RATS.


The value of carnivorous mammals and the larger birds of prey in
destroying rats should be more fully recognized, especially by the
farmer and the game preserver. Chief among the animals that are useful
in destroying these rodents are the fox, skunk, and weasel, and the
larger species of owls and hawks. Rats destroy more poultry and game,
both eggs and young chicks, than all the birds and wild mammals named
combined, yet some of our most useful birds of prey and carnivorous
mammals are persecuted almost to the point of extinction. An enlightened
public sentiment should cause the repeal of all bounties on these
animals and afford protection to the majority of them.




CONCLUSIONS.


By the persistent use of traps, occasional resort to poison, and the
exercise of forethought in the construction of farm buildings so as to
minimize the opportunities for harborage, farmers and others may prevent
the greater part of the loss and annoyance they now experience from rat
depredations. The same statement applies in great measure to city and
village conditions. Hence cooperation in the warfare on rats is
particularly important and can not be too strongly urged.





End of Project Gutenberg's Methods of Destroying Rats, by David Lantz

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK METHODS OF DESTROYING RATS ***

***** This file should be named 34437.txt or 34437.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/4/3/34437/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
