The Project Gutenberg EBook of A New Extinct Emydid Turtle from the Lower
Pliocene of Oklahoma, by Edwin C. Galbreath

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A New Extinct Emydid Turtle from the Lower Pliocene of Oklahoma

Author: Edwin C. Galbreath

Release Date: November 26, 2010 [EBook #34449]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A NEW EXTINCT EMYDID TURTLE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









              A New Extinct Emydid Turtle from the Lower
                         Pliocene of Oklahoma

                                  BY

                          EDWIN C. GALBREATH


                  University of Kansas Publications
                      Museum of Natural History

                Volume 1, No. 16, pp. 265-280, plate 1
                           August 16, 1948


                         University of Kansas
                               LAWRENCE
                                 1948




     UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

   Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman; H. H. Lane, Edward H. Taylor

                Volume 1, No. 16, pp. 265-280, plate 1
                           August 16, 1948


                         UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                           Lawrence, Kansas


                              PRINTED BY
                   FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
                            TOPEKA, KANSAS
                                 1948

                               22-3340




    [Illustration: PLATE 1. _Chrysemys limnodytes._ Univ. Kans.
    Mus. Nat. Hist., Vert. Paleo. Coll. No. 7676. Fig. A, dorsal
    view of carapace; fig. B, ventral view of plastron. Both views
    approximately Ã— .4.]




         A New Extinct Emydid Turtle from the Lower Pliocene
                             of Oklahoma

                                  By

                          EDWIN C. GALBREATH


In the summer of 1946 a party from the University of Kansas Museum of
Natural History visited exposures of the Laverne formation in Beaver
County, Oklahoma, at the invitation of Dr. Stuart Schoff of the United
States Geological Survey. When examining the marl beds an Emydid turtle
was discovered which appears to be an unnamed species of the genus
_Chrysemys_. A description of the new species follows.


                   Chrysemys limnodytes, new species

  _Holotype._--University of Kansas Museum of Natural History No.
  7676, vertebrate paleontological collection, a turtle consisting of
  a fragmental anterior portion of a carapace, left part of the
  plastron, and several marginals collected by the 1946
  paleontological field party of the University of Kansas Museum of
  Natural History.

  _Geological Age and locality._--Marl beds of the Laverne formation,
  early Pliocene age, in SW 1/4 Sec. 15, T. 4 N., R. 25 ECM, Beaver
  County, Oklahoma. The specimen was removed from the marl
  immediately below the fossil leaf zone (see Chaney and Elias, 1936;
  Frye and Hibbard, 1940).

  _Diagnosis._--Size large (see measurements) and differing from
  other species of _Chrysemys_ in having: The anterior end of the
  carapace broadly concave, the posterolateral marginals not greatly
  flared, the posterior end of the plastron broadly indented, the
  carapace more sculptured and relatively wider.

_Description of type._--The specimen had been badly damaged before
preservation, and had suffered further damage from exposure before
discovery. The anterior and posterior lobes of the plastron had been
folded over the bridge, forming a three-ply thickness of bone. Of the
carapace, only the following parts are known: Fragment of the nuchal;
right 1st, 7th, 8th, and 9th marginals, left 1st, 2d, 7th, 8th, 9th, and
11th marginals; costals 1-5 on the right side; costals 1-4 on the left
side; and 1st, 2d, 3d, and 4th neurals. The left half of the plastron is
relatively complete, lacking only the epiplastron and entoplastron. The
left 7th, 8th, and 9th marginals are joined to the plastron at the
inguinal buttress, and the right 7th, 8th, and 9th marginals are
attached to the fifth costal. The carapace has smooth contours with no
keel present, but on the lower half of the costals there are seven or
eight ridges, and the remaining surface of the costals and neurals are
rugose. The marginals lack ridges, and the posterolateral marginals are
not serrated. The anterior end of the carapace has a broad shallow
notch. The first neural is rounded, and the 2d, 3d, and 4th are
hexagonal, with the broad ends forward. Anterior margins of the 2d and
3d neurals are concave, and the anterior margin of the 4th neural is
straight.

The sulci bounding the scutes are moderately impressed. The width of the
first vertebral scute, anteriorly and posteriorly, is less than the
width of the second vertebral scute. The costal scutes join the marginal
scutes on the marginal plates.

The plastron, broadly indented at the posterior end, does not have the
posterior lobe flared laterally as it is in Recent species of
_Chrysemys_, and lacks any pronounced notch at the femoro-anal suture.
The humero-pectoral sulcus crosses the plastron behind the entoplastron
in a straight line, and reaches the border anterior to the axillary
notch. The pectoro-abdominal suture is anteriorly convex at the sides
and concave at the midline.

A comparison of this carapace and plastron with a series of specimens of
Recent _Chrysemys picta_ and _Pseudemys scripta_ of approximately the
same size reveals characters indicated in the following chart:

  ==================================================================
   RECENT _Chrysemys_ | _Chrysemys limnodytes_ | RECENT _Pseudemys_
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Not serrated.       | Posterolateral         | Serrated.
                      | marginals not serrated.|
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Not notched.        | Carapace with broad    | Notched.
                      | shallow notch at       |
                      | anterior end.          |
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Occasional faint    | Plastron does not have | Distinct notch at
  notch at femoro-anal| a pronounced notch at  | femoro-anal suture.
  suture.             | femoro-anal suture.    |
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Posterior lobe of   | Posterior lobe of      | Posterior lobe of
  plastron flares     | plastron does not      | plastron does not
  laterally.          | flare laterally.       | flare laterally.
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Carapace smooth.    | Carapace has smooth    | Carapace has
                      | contours.              | depressions and
                      |                        | elevations.
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Old specimens       | Seven or eight ridges  | Ridges cover
  occasionally have   | on lower half of       | costals.
  five or six ridges  | costals.               |
  near border of      | Remaining surface of   |
  costals.            | costals and neurals    |
                      | rugose.                |
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  No ridges on        | No ridges on           | May or may not
  marginals.          | marginals.             | have ridges on
                      |                        | marginals.
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Nuchal smooth.      | Nuchal smooth.         | Nuchal has ridges.
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Carapace not        | Probably arched less   | Greatly arched.
  greatly arched.     | than in _Pseudemys_,   |
                      | but more than in any   |
                      | Recent _Chrysemys_.    |
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Keel often present  | No keel present.       | Keel often present.
  at birth, but soon  |                        |
  lost.               |                        |
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Anterior and        | Anterior and posterior | Anterior width of
  posterior widths of | widths of first        | first vertebral
  first vertebral     | vertebral scute less   | scute less than
  scute approximately | than width of second   | posterior width,
  same as width of    | vertebral scute.       | or both dimensions
  second vertebral    |                        | less than width of
  scute.              |                        | second vertebral
                      |                        | scute.
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------
  Ribs do not tend    | Ribs not prominent on  | Ribs tend to be
  to be prominent on  | costals.               | prominent on
  costals.            |                        | costals.
  --------------------+------------------------+--------------------

Hay attached considerable taxonomic importance to the characters of the
nuchal and I find its characters to be fairly constant in the specimens
of Emydidae examined. Although the nuchal of _Chrysemys limnodytes_ is
incomplete, it can be distinguished from the nuchals described by Hay as
types of his several fossil Emydids. Differences in the nuchal, together
with those in the carapace and plastron, serve to distinguish the
species from other genera of the Emydidae.

When the specimen is compared with _Chrysemys timida_ Hay, of the
Nebraska Pleistocene, many similarities, mostly of generic rank, are
seen. _Chrysemys limnodytes_ is broader in relation to length than is
either _C. timida_ or any Recent specimen examined of the same size. The
greatest allowance possible in estimating the length of _C. limnodytes_
fails to bring the ratio of its breadth to length within the range of
Recent specimens of similar size. Data from 96 specimens of Recent
_Chrysemys picta_ show that the ratio of length to width is not affected
by sex, but that the ratio does vary with the age of the specimen. In
young animals the length and width are approximately equal, but with
further growth the length becomes relatively greater. Specimens in the
length group of 135 to 144 mm. have the widths ranging from 71 to 81 per
cent of the lengths. In all specimens larger than this, the ratio is in
the low seventies, and the largest specimen, 177 mm. in length, has the
width of the carapace amounting to only 74 per cent of the length. The
fossil species, _C. timida_, with a length of 160 mm., has the width
amounting to 75 per cent of the length, and _C. limnodytes_, with an
estimated length of 180 mm., has the width amounting to 80.5 per cent of
the length. _C. timida_ is widest anteriorly, whereas _C. limnodytes_
and the other species of the genus are widest posteriorly. Less obvious
differences between the two fossils are the narrower anterior margin of
the nuchal, the concave anterior end of the carapace, the sculptured
surface of the carapace, and the relatively wider neurals and longer
vertebrals of _C. limnodytes_.


DIMENSIONS OF THE TYPE SPECIMEN

(In millimeters)

Total length of carapace, 180 (estimated); greatest width of carapace,
145 (estimated); height of carapace, more than 50.

Length of plastron, 165 (estimated); width of plastron, 130 (estimated);
length of anterior lobe, 45 (estimated); width of anterior lobe, 75
(estimated); length of posterior lobe, 62; width of posterior lobe, 82;
length of bridge from axillary to inguinal notch, 60.


PLATES OF THE CARAPACE AND PLASTRON

Nuchal: Width of anterior margin, 12 (estimated); greatest width, 37
(estimated); length at midline, 35 (estimated).

First neural: Greatest width, 13; length at midline, 17. Second neural:
Greatest width, 16; length at midline, 14. Third neural: Greatest width,
18; length at midline, 16. Fourth neural: Greatest width, 18; length at
midline, 16.

Costals: Thickness at proximal end, 3-5; thickness at distal end, 2.
First costal: Length of margin bordering nuchal, 23 (this and the
following measurements of the costal and marginal plates are of plates
from the right side of the animal except those indicated by an "L");
length of margin bordering neurals, 17; length of margin bordering
marginals, 38; length of margin bordering 2d costal, 51. Second costal:
Length of margin bordering 1st costal, 53; length of margin bordering
neurals, 16; length of margin bordering marginals, 25; length of margin
bordering 3d costal, 56. Third costal: Length of margin bordering 2d
costal, 55 (L), 56; length of margin bordering neurals, 19; length of
margin bordering marginals, 18; length of margin bordering 4th costal,
58. Fourth costal: Length of margin bordering 3d costal, 58; length of
margin bordering neurals, 16; length of margin bordering marginals, 22;
length of margin bordering 5th costal, 55. Fifth costal: Length of
margin bordering 4th costal, 52; length of margin bordering neurals, 16;
length of margin bordering marginals, 20; length of margin bordering 6th
costal, 41.

First marginal: Length of margin bordering nuchal, 23 (L), 21; length of
outer margin, 23 (L), 23; length of inner margin, 12 (L), 12; length of
margin bordering 2d marginal, 22 (L), 21. Second marginal: Length of
margin bordering 1st marginal, 22 (L); length of outer margin, 22 (L);
length of inner margin, 15 (L); length of margin bordering 3d marginal,
16 (L). Seventh marginal: Length of margin bordering 6th marginal, 18
(L), 17 (estimated); length of outer margin, 25 (L), 23 (estimated);
length of inner margin, 18 (L), 18; length of margin bordering 8th
marginal, 22 (L), 22. Eighth marginal: Length of margin bordering 7th
marginal, 22 (L), 23; length of outer margin, 22 (estimate of L), 22;
length of inner margin, 18 (L), 18; length of margin bordering 9th
marginal, 24 (estimate of L), 23. Ninth marginal: Length of margin
bordering 8th marginal, 24 (L); length of outer margin, 20 (L), 19;
length of inner margin, 19 (L); length of margin bordering 10th
marginal, 23 (L), 23. Eleventh marginal: Length of margin bordering 10th
marginal, 22 (L); length of outer margin, 16 (L); length of inner
margin, 12 (L); length of margin bordering pygal, 18 (L).

Entoplastron: Width, 24 (estimated).

Hyoplastron: Length of margin bordering epiplastron, 25; length of
margin on midline, 37; length from junction of epiplastronal border and
outer border to point on posterior border equidistant from midline, 53;
width from midline to axillary notch, 39; distance between axillary
notch and posterior border, 31.

Hypoplastron: Length of margin bordering midline, 42; length of
posterior (xiphiplastronal) margin, 40; distance from junction of
xiphiplastronal margin and outer margin to point on anterior border
equidistant from midline, 49 (estimated); distance between inguinal
notch and anterior border, 29.

Xiphiplastron: Length of anterior (hypoplastronal) margin, 38; length of
margin along midline, 43; distance from extreme posterior extension of
xiphiplastron to midline, 14.


SCUTES OF CARAPACE AND PLASTRON

First marginal scute: Length of margin bordering 2d marginal, 15 (L),
14; length of anterior margin, 15 (L); length of posterior margin, 14
(L); length of inner margin, 13 (L); length of outer margin, 23 (L).
Third marginal scute: Length of anterior margin, 14 (L). Eighth marginal
scute: Length of anterior margin, 15 (L), 15; length of posterior
margin, 16 (estimate of L), 16; length of inner margin, 20 (L), 20;
length of outer margin, 25 (estimate of L), 25. Ninth marginal scute:
Length of anterior margin, 17 (L), 16; length of posterior margin, 17
(L), 17; length of inner margin, 18 (L), 20; length of outer margin, 21
(L), 21. Tenth marginal scute: Length of anterior margin, 17 (L), 17.
Eleventh marginal scute: Length of posterior margin, 14 (L).

First costal scute: Length of margin bordering vertebrals, 45. Second
costal scute: Length of margin bordering vertebrals, 35 (L), 35; length
of margin bordering 3d costal scute, 52.

First vertebral scute: Length of anterior margin, 24 (estimated);
greatest width, 32 (estimated); length at midline, 35 (estimated).
Second vertebral scute: Length of anterior margin, 27; greatest width,
42; length at midline, 29. Third vertebral scute: Length of anterior
margin, 33; greatest width, 42; length at midline, 40 (estimated).

Pectoral scute: Length of humero-pectoral sulcus from midline to outer
border, 38; length of margin of pectoral scute on midline, 18; distance
between junction of humero-pectoral sulcus and outer border and point
on pectoro-abdominal sulcus equidistant from midline, 19; distance from
axillary notch to point on pectoro-abdominal sulcus equidistant from
midline, 17.

Abdominal scute: Length of margin of scute on midline, 43; width of
posterior border of abdominal scute from midline to inguinal notch, 41;
distance from inguinal notch to a point on pectoro-abdominal sulcus
equidistant from midline, 44.

Femoral scute: Length of border of scute on midline, 24; width of
anterior border of scute from midline to inguinal notch, 41; width of
posterior border of scute from midline to outer border (along sulcus),
40; length of outer margin of scute from inguinal notch to femoro-anal
sulcus, 46.

Anal scute: Length of margin at midline, 36; length of femoro-anal
sulcus, 40.


_Remarks._--Noteworthy is the intermediate nature of _C. limnodytes_
when compared with species of the genera _Chrysemys_ and _Pseudemys_.
However, any resemblance to _Pseudemys_ is not to be considered as
evidence that _C. limnodytes_ is in any way ancestral to the genus
_Pseudemys_. The fossil specimens of _Pseudemys_ from the Pliocene are
too poorly known to allow the student certainly to place them in their
correct systematic positions. The fossil Emydids from Western Europe,
listed as species of _Chrysemys_, differ very much from this species, or
belong to other genera of the family.

Only a few turtles are known from the Laverne formation. Hesse (Chaney
and Elias, 1936) reported a small _Testudo_ from the Laverne of Beaver
County, Oklahoma, but neglected to state whether it was among the
material borrowed by him from the University of Kansas Museum of Natural
History. The Museum has an incomplete carapace and plastron (No. 3101)
of a small _Testudo_ from that locality and formation. In Harper County,
Oklahoma, the field party from the University recovered a large number
of fragments of a large _Testudo_. Although this specimen is as yet
unprepared, enough fragments have been pieced together to reveal that
the tibia is 127 mm. long. This dimension and those of some of the
fragments indicate that the animal may have been four to five feet long.

Mrs. Bernita Mansfield of the Geology Department, University of Kansas,
prepared the plate.




LITERATURE CITED


BERGOUNIOUX, FREDERIC-MARIE.

  1935. Contribution a l'Ã©tude palÃ©ontoligique des chÃ©loniens:
        ChÃ©loniens fossiles du Bassin d'Aquitaine. Memoires de la
        SociÃ©tÃ© gÃ©ologique de France, vol. 11, Mem. 25, pp. 1-215,
        44 figs., 16 pls.

  1937. Relations fauniques entre des chÃ©lonien fossiles de l'Espagne
        et de la France. Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Paris, vol. 204,
        pp. 793-795.

  1938. ChÃ©loniens fossiles d'Espagne. Bulletin de la Societe
        d'histoire Naturelle de Toulouse, vol. 72, pp. 257-288,
        7 figs.

CHANEY, R. W., and ELIAS, M. K.

  1936. Late Tertiary Floras from the High Plains, with a Chapter
        on the Lower Pliocene Vertebrate Fossils from the Ogallala
        Formation (Lavern Zone) of Beaver County, Oklahoma, by
        Curtis J. Hesse. Publ. Carnegie Inst. Wash., No. 476,
        pp. 1-72, 11 figs., 7 pls.

FRYE, J. C., and HIBBARD, C. W.

  1941. Pliocene and Pleistocene Stratigraphy and Paleontology of
        the Meade Basin, Southwestern Kansas. University of Kansas
        Publications, State Geological Survey of Kansas, Bulletin 38,
        pp. 389-424, 3 figs., 4 pls.

HAY, O. P.

  1908. The Fossil Turtles of North America. Publ. Carnegie Inst.
        Wash., No. 75, pp. i-iv, 1-568, 704 figs., 113 pls.


  _Transmitted March 1, 1948._


                               22-3340





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A New Extinct Emydid Turtle from the
Lower Pliocene of Oklahoma, by Edwin C. Galbreath

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A NEW EXTINCT EMYDID TURTLE ***

***** This file should be named 34449-8.txt or 34449-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/4/4/34449/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
