Project Gutenberg's Bees from British Guiana, by T. D. A. Cockerell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bees from British Guiana
       Bulletin of the AMNH, Vol. XXXVIII, Art. XX, pp. 685-690

Author: T. D. A. Cockerell

Release Date: December 5, 2010 [EBook #34579]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEES FROM BRITISH GUIANA ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                      _Bees from British Guiana_

                        BY T. D. A. COCKERELL



                               BULLETIN
                                  OF
                THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

                  VOL. XXXVIII, ART. XX, pp. 685-690

                    _New York, December 21, 1918_



59.57.99(88)

#Article XX.#--BEES FROM BRITISH GUIANA

BY T. D. A. COCKERELL.


In connection with the work of the Tropical Research Station of the New
York Zoological Society, conducted by Mr. William Beebe, collections of
insects, including bees, were made. The present report deals with a
series of bees from the Bartica District, and Mr. John Tee Van, in
forwarding them, states that "almost all of these bees were procured
about a clump of several species of nightshades (_Solanum_), which were
flowering in thinned-out jungle." I give an artificial key, which will
enable one who is not a specialist in bees to separate readily each
species from the rest. It will, of course, remain necessary to compare
any species with a fuller account to make sure that it is not some form
unrepresented in the present collection. The types of the new species
and varieties from British Guiana are deposited in The American Museum
of Natural History. Species marked P. are from the Penal Settlement;
those marked K. occur at Kalacoon.

      The body, or some part of it, brilliant green                   1.
      No part of the body brilliant green                            11.

   1. Thorax dark, with more or less purple tints, not bright green   2.
      Thorax bright or clear green, at least in part                  4.

   2. Small bee, less than 10 mm. long
                                _Augochlora callichlorura_, new species.
      Large, robust bees, greatly exceeding 10 mm.                    3.

   3. Abdomen with the first two segments dark; tongue not extending
        to end of abdomen                   _Eufriesia pulchra_ (Smith).
      Abdomen all bright green, with brassy tints; tongue extending
        backward far beyond tip of abdomen
                                          _Euglossa brullei_ Lepeletier.

   4. Hind margins of abdominal segments broadly black.
                              _Augochlora nigromarginata_ (Spinola).--P.
      Hind margins of abdominal segments green                        5.
      Hind margins of abdominal segments red or whitish; very
        robust bees                                                  10.

   5. Small bee, less than 10 mm. long, the clypeus with a
        transverse apical ivory-colored band    _Ceratina læta_ Spinola.
      Larger, very robust bees                                        6.

   6. Tongue extending beyond abdomen posteriorly                     7.
      Tongue not extending beyond abdomen                             8.

   7. Scutellum with a patch of black tomentum
                                        _Euglossa ignita_ Smith; female.
      Scutellum without a patch of black tomentum
                                          _Euglossa ignita_ Smith; male.

   8. Robust bees, about 10 mm. long or a little over; scutellum
        with, a patch of black tomentum
                                       _Euglossa cordata_ (Linnæus).--P.
      Much larger bees, a little over 20 mm. long                     9.

   9. Scutellum with an obtuse median keel; posterior angles of
        scutellum rounded                 _Exærele smaragdina_ (Guérin).

      Scutellum depressed in middle, without any keel; posterior
        angles of scutellum rather prominent  _Exærele dentata_ (Linné).

  10. Scutellum with a patch of light fulvous tomentum; scape red.
                  _Euglossa decorata ruficauda_, new variety; female--K.

      Scutellum with a patch of black tomentum; scape dark, with
        a pale yellow mark            _Euglossa singularis_ Mocsáry.--P.

      Scutellum without a patch of tomentum; scape pale yellow
        in front.      _Euglossa decorata ruficauda_, new variety; male.

  11. Very large bees, anterior wing at least 23 mm. long; integument
        partly or wholly ferruginous                                 12.
      Anterior wing less than 20 mm. long                            13.

  12. Abdomen with broad black bands.
                   _Xylocopa frontalis nitens_ (Lepeletier); male[A]--P.
      Abdomen without black bands      _Xylocopa fimbriala_ (Fabricius).

  13. Wasp-like bee, with fusiform abdomen, reddish wings and red
        legs; three complete submarginal cells, first recurrent
        nervure meeting second transversocubital
                                         _Rhathymus beebei_, new species
      Otherwise formed, the abdomen broad at base                    14.

  14. Surface of eyes with fine short hair; first abdominal segment
        red, the others black; female abdomen sharply pointed.
                       _Cælioxys ardescens_ Cockerell. (Hym. 6 and 138.)
      Eyes not hairy; female abdomen not sharply pointed             15.

  15. Anterior wings with three complete submarginal cells           16.
      Anterior wings with submarginal cells incomplete or wanting;
        stingless social bees                                        29.

  16. Small bee, about 8 mm. long; wings beyond middle milky-white,
        the extreme apex dusky     _Tetrapedia lacteipennis_ Vachal.--P.
      Larger bees; the wings not thus colored                        17.

  17. Abdomen clear ferruginous; large robust bees                   18.
      Abdomen not ferruginous; or only partly so                     19.

  18. Hind legs with black hair     _Centris personata_ Smith; male.--P.
      Hind legs with pale hair    _Centris personata_ Smith; female.--P.

  19. Integument with at least some bluish, purplish or greenish
        tints; abdomen not banded; form very robust                  20.
      Integument not at all metallic (very slightly in _Eulæma
        nigrita_, variety)                                           21.

  20. Larger; anterior wing at least 17 mm. long; head and thorax
        with black hair; fourth and fifth abdominal segments purple
                                            _Eulæma nigrita_ Lepeletier.
      Much smaller; cheeks densely covered with white hair; clypeus
        black in female, yellow in male  _Xylocopa barbata_ (Fabricius).

  21. Thorax and abdomen hairy; hair of thorax yellow, with
        a transverse black band, of abdomen black, with a
        transverse yellow band.               _Bombus incarum_ Franklin.
      Not thus colored                                               22.

  22. Clypeus with two longitudinal keels                            23.
      Clypeus with a single, median longitudinal keel, sharp and
        extending its whole length; black bee, with black hair.
                        _Eulæma nigrita_ Lepeletier, variety; female.[B]
      Clypeus without any distinct keels                             25.

  23. Scutellum with two large yellow marks.
                        _Epicharis maculata barticana_, new variety.--K.
      Scutellum with the integument all dark                         24.

  24. Second abdominal segment with a yellow mark on each side.
                                          _Epicharis affinis_ Smith.--P.
      Abdomen with the integument all black
                                      _Epicharis rustica_ (Olivier).--P.

  25. Less than 12 mm. long; wings not deep fuliginous               26.
      Over 18 mm. long; wings deep fuliginous                        27.

  26. Hair bands of abdomen broad; male with long antennæ and
        yellow clypeus.            _Florilegus barticanus_, new species.
      Hair bands of abdomen linear; integument of clypeus black.
                                          _Melitoma fulvifrons_ (Smith).

  27. Hair of mesothorax and scutellum dark brown; apical part of
        abdomen with integument red  _Centris fusciventris_ Mocsáry.--P.
      Hair of mesothorax and scutellum red                           28.

  28. Face with yellow markings; anterior wing about 14 mm. long.
                                         _Centris lineolata_ Lepeletier.
      Face without yellow markings; anterior wing about 20 mm. long.
                                      _Centris atriventris_ Mocsáry.--P.

  29. Robust bees, not less than 9 mm. long                          30.
      Small, fly-like bees, not nearly 9 mm. long                    32.

  30. Thorax with ferruginous hair; integument of scutellum yellow.
                    _Melipona fasciata barticensis_ Cockerell, ined.--P.
      Thorax with dorsal hair not ferruginous                        31.

  31. Abdomen more or less reddish, at least the first segment
        dorsally pale red.    _Melipona intermixta_ Cockerell, ined.--P.
      Abdomen black, with narrow yellowish-white tegumentary
        bands; a tuft of dark red hair before each tegula.
                                  _Melipona interrupta_ (Latreille).--K.

  32. Legs mainly red; clypeus yellow      _Trigona longipes_ Smith.--K.
      Legs and clypeus black    _Trigona_ sp. (specimens imperfect).--P.


    [A] The female of _X. nitens_ is black, with dark wings. It was
        not in the material sent. The female of _X. fimbriala_ is
        also black.

    [B] A little purple can be seen at sides of abdomen, but it is
        easily overlooked.


NOTES AND DESCRIPTIONS

#Melipona interrupta# (Latreille).--In the specimen sent, the bands on
second and following segments are notched above in middle, with only an
obscure linear interruption.

#Melipona fasciata barticensis# Cockerell.--One specimen has five linear
red bands on abdomen, but in another the bands are very indistinct,
almost obsolete.

#Melipona intermixta# Cockerell.--The ground color of the first three
abdominal tergites varies; in the lighter forms that of the first is
pale fulvous with the shoulders blackish, of the second and third clear
ferruginous.

#Euglossa singularis# Mocsáry.--Judging from the brief description, it
appears that #E. meliponoides# Ducke is probably the same species.


#Euglossa decorata# Smith, var. #ruficauda#, new variety

Both sexes with abdomen ferruginous, apically more or less dusky, but
the whole effect lighter and redder than typical; scutellum green with
the hind margin red. Tuft on female scutellum light fulvous. The female,
from Kalacoon, (Hym. 212) is the type of the variety.


#Euglossa ignita# Smith, var. #chlorosoma#, new variety

Green, without coppery tints, but variably suffused with purple. It is
smaller than _E. piliventris_, with shorter mouth-parts, and the labrum
pallid with a pair of dusky spots. A male in the U. S. Nat. Museum from
Bartica, which I reported as _E. piliventris_, belongs here. Female _E.
piliventris_ has long yellow hairs on the anterior margin of hind
basitarsus, but in _chlorosoma_ the hair in this situation is black. The
type of the variety is a female labelled Hym. 140. A female from
Kalacoon has brassy and coppery tints on the apical part of abdomen, and
must be referred to _E. ignita_ proper. The type locality of _ignita_ is
Jamaica.

#Ceratina læta# Spinola. This was described from the female. The
specimen sent is a male, and differs from the female in being smaller,
and having a transverse band on anterior margin of clypeus, triangular
marks on lower corners of face, and a large patch (emarginate above) on
labrum all ivory-white. This is very like _C. viridula_ Smith, which
Ducke considers a synonym of _læta_, but the base of the metathorax
seems to differ, and the nervures are piceous. For the present,
therefore, I retain _C. viridula_ as a distinct species. The female of
_C. viridula_, collected by Busck in the Panama Canal Zone, is also
distinguishable from that sex of _C. læta_.


#Epicharis maculata# var. #barticana#, new variety

[Female].--Base of mandibles with a large cuneiform yellow mark; a broad
black band down each side of labrum; yellow spots on prothorax large;
scutellum with a pair of large transversely oval yellow areas, separated
by a narrow black band; band on second abdominal segment with a
posterior median projection. Kalacoon, 1916. (Hym. 217.)


#Rhathymus beebei#, new species

[Female].--Length about 22 mm., anterior wing 18 mm.; head clear
ferruginous, with red hair, lower part of face more pallid, with a
creamy tint; apical half of mandibles black; clypeus prominent, minutely
roughened, with a smooth median line; mesothorax black, with a median
ridge, the surface on each side of this strongly punctured, but shining
between the punctures; rest of thorax ferruginous, and all of thorax
with ferruginous hair; scutellum not bigibbous, but with an elevated
transverse ridge; pleura with a blackish area below the wings; lower
part of mesopleura with a shining tubercle; tegulæ clear ferruginous,
finely punctured; wings strongly reddened; legs clear ferruginous;
abdomen fusiform, shining; first two segments dull reddish, pallid
posterolaterally, the others reddish black, with the hind margins
redder; apical plate very large, concave. Bartica District (Hym. 19).
Very distinct by the transverse straight ridge on scutellum; nearest
perhaps to the considerably smaller _R. unicolor_ Smith, but that has
dark fuscous wings. The antennæ are unfortunately missing.


#Augochlora callichlorura#, new species

[Female].--Length a little over 7 mm.; first two abdominal segments
rather weakly vibrissate on hind margin with orange hairs; hind spur of
hind leg with long spines. Head and thorax very dark purplish, nearly
black, but a blue-green spot at upper end of clypeus, supraclypeal area
brilliant purple, and base of metathorax strongly tinged with purple;
anterior and middle legs dark, with weak purple tints, but hind femora,
tibiæ and basal half of basitarsi all brilliant green on outer side;
abdomen short and broad, shining, very brilliant emerald green. Head
broad, eyes strongly converging below; clypeus with extremely large
punctures; front dull and granular; ocelli ordinary; cheeks with thin
white hair; mesothorax and scutellum shining, but well punctured; base
of metathorax with strong short plicæ; angles of prothorax not
prominent; tegulæ rufotestaceous; wings grayish translucent, stigma and
nervures dusky pale brown; first recurrent nervure meeting second
transversocubital; abdomen with thin pale hair, hind margins of segments
not darkened. Bartica District.

Unique by the combination of purplish head and thorax and green abdomen,
the general effect recalling _A. atropos_ Smith.


#Florilegus barticanus#, new species.

[Male].--Length about 11 mm.; black, except as follows: first abdominal
segment strongly greenish; clypeus and labrum entirely yellow; mandibles
fulvous apically (but base black); antennæ, except the first two joints,
ferruginous beneath; hind tarsi, and apex of hind tibiæ, dusky red; hair
of head and thorax ferruginous, paler below, no admixture of dark hairs;
eyes reddish; mesothorax shining, but distinctly punctured; tegulæ clear
ferruginous; wings dusky hyaline, nervures reddish fuscous; legs with
pale hair, conspicuously plumose on hind tibiæ; abdomen with four broad
dense ochraceous hair-bands, that on fourth segment broadly excavated in
middle posteriorly, on fifth broadly interrupted; sixth segment with a
small patch of fulvous hair on each side; apical part of abdomen
dorsally, except for the bands and patches, with very dark fuscous hair.
Bartica District (Hym. 11).

Related to _F. lanieri_ Guér. from Cuba and _F. condigna_ Cresson from
the United States. In the coloration of the legs it is intermediate
between these two.

#Tetrapedia lacteipennis# Vachal.--It should be added to Vachal's
description, that the dorsal abdominal segments 2 to 4 have yellow
bands.

The Bartica collection contains a _Megalopta_ from Hoorie, but it is
unfortunately broken. I have _Megalopta panamensis_ Cockerell from
Maroni, French Guiana (Queensland Museum, 42).

I add the description of a new species from French Guiana, the type of
which is in my collection.


#Augochlora maroniana#, new species

[Female].--Length slightly over 8 mm.; head, thorax and legs bright
green; abdomen yellowish green strongly suffused with coppery, the first
two segments with apical fringes of orange hair; face rather narrow;
antennæ black; lower middle of clypeus black; mesothorax and scutellum
rough with dense punctatures, the scutellum with two copper-red spots;
area of metathorax with very feeble plicæ; tegulæ black with pallid
margin, the basal side broadly green; wings dusky; second s. m. square;
first r. n. meeting second t. c; stigma dusky reddish; legs with mainly
pale hair, hind tibiæ with dark hair on outer side basally; hind spur
with about six long spines; basal half of basitarsi green on outer side;
abdomen shining, with pale ochreus hair.

Maroni, French Guiana (Queensland Mus., 43). Related to _A. cupreola_
(Ckll.), but with the vibrissate fringes on abdomen nearly twice as
long, and deep orange-fulvous, and the mesothorax much more densely
punctured. Also related to _A. diversipennis_ (Lep.), but with the face
much narrower, and the area of metathorax much less distinctly plicate.
From _A. calypso_ Sm. it is known by the wings not being yellowish, the
inner orbits not edged with blue, and the tarsi not ferruginous.




                             PUBLICATIONS
                                  OF
                THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY


MEMOIRS

  Volume I. Zoology and Palæontology.
  Volumes II-VIII. Anthropology.
  Volume IX. Zoology and Palæontology.
  Volumes X-XIV. Anthropology.

Volumes II, IV, V, VII, VIII, X-XIV, and an Ethnographical Album form
Volumes I-VII of the Memoirs of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition.


MEMOIRS--NEW SERIES

  Volumes I and II. Zoology and Palæontology.


BULLETIN

  Volumes I-XXIV, XXV, parts 1 and 2, and XXVI-XXXIX.


ANTHROPOLOGICAL PAPERS

Volumes I-IX, X, parts 1-6; XI, XII, parts 1-5; XIII; XIV, parts 1 and
2; XV, part 1; XVI, parts 1-3; XVII, parts 1-4; XVIII, parts 1 and 2;
and XIX, part 1.


MONOGRAPHS

A Review of the Primates. By D. G. Elliot. 3 volumes.

Hitherto Unpublished Plates of Tertiary Mammals and Permian Vertebrates.
By E. D. Cope and W. D. Matthew.


THE AMERICAN MUSEUM JOURNAL

Volumes I-XVIII. The Journal is a popular record of the progress of The
American Museum of Natural History, issued monthly from October to May.

HANDBOOKS. Numbers 1-6.

GUIDE LEAFLETS. Numbers 1-48.

ANNUAL REPORTS. First (1869) to Forty-ninth (1917).

A more detailed list, with prices, of these publications may be had upon
application to the Librarian of the Museum.





End of Project Gutenberg's Bees from British Guiana, by T. D. A. Cockerell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEES FROM BRITISH GUIANA ***

***** This file should be named 34579-8.txt or 34579-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/5/7/34579/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
