The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Narrative of the Death of Captain James
Cook, by David Samwell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Narrative of the Death of Captain James Cook

Author: David Samwell

Release Date: December 13, 2010 [EBook #34634]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEATH OF CAPTAIN JAMES COOK ***




Produced by Patrick Hopkins, Cindy Horton, Chris Curnow
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note

- Footnotes are located at the end of the text, before the index.

- In general, geographical references, spelling, hyphenation, and
capitalization have been retained as in the original publication.

- Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

- Significant typographical errors have been corrected. A full list of
these corrections is available in the Transcriber's Corrections section
at the end of the book.

       *       *       *       *       *




                         Hawaiian
           Historical Society Reprints, (No. 2)
                          (1779)



                 A Narrative of the Death
                            OF
                    Captain James Cook



                     By DAVID SAMWELL
                 Surgeon of The Discovery



                          LONDON:
  Printed for G. C. J. and J. Robinson, Pater-Noster-Row
                        MDCCLXXXVI

  (The Edition of this Reprint is Limited to 500 Copies)




[Illustration: _CAPTAIN JAMES COOK_]




                             A

                     N A R R A T I V E

                          OF THE

                       D  E  A  T  H

                            OF

            C A P T A I N  J A M E S  C O O K.

                  TO WHICH ARE ADDED SOME

              P  A  R  T  I  C  U  L  A  R  S,

                      CONCERNING HIS

            L I F E  A N D  C H A R A C T E R.

                           AND

            O  B  S  E  R  V  A  T  I  O  N  S

                      RESPECTING THE

            I  N  T  R  O  D  U  C  T  I  O  N

                          OF THE

              V E N E R E A L  D I S E A S E

                          INTO THE

              S A N D W I C H  I S L A N D S.

               BY  D A V I D  S A M W E L L,
                 SURGEON OF THE DISCOVERY.

                     L  O  N  D  O  N:
  PRINTED FOR G. C. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATER-NOSTER-ROW,
                        MDCCLXXXVI.

  [Photographic reproduction of the original title page.]




Foreword


In presenting this reprint to our members the editor wishes to express
his thanks to Professor W. T. Brigham of the Bishop Museum for
furnishing him with a photograph of Captain Cook, from which the cut in
this reprint was made; to Mr. John F. G. Stokes of the Bishop Museum for
his assistance in identifying the Hawaiian names, and to Mr. J. W.
Waldron for furnishing a typewritten copy of the book of which this is a
reprint.

The modern Hawaiian names are inserted in brackets following those given
in the text.

This reprint was edited and indexed for the Hawaiian Historical Society
by Bruce Cartwright, Jr.




Preface


To those who have perused the account of the last voyage to the Pacific
Ocean, the following sheets may, at first sight, appear superfluous. The
author, however, being of the opinion, that the event of Captain Cook's
death has not yet been so explicitly related as the importance of it
required, trusts that this Narrative will not be found altogether a
repetition of what is already known. At the same time, he wishes to add
his humble testimony to the merit of the account given of this
transaction by Captain King. Its brevity alone can afford an excuse for
this publication, the object of which is to give a more particular
relation of that unfortunate affair, which he finds is in general but
imperfectly understood. He thinks himself warranted in saying this, from
having frequently observed, that the public opinion seemed to attribute
the loss of Captain Cook's life, in some measure, to rashness or too
much confidence on his side; whereas nothing can be more ill-founded or
unjust. It is, therefore, a duty which his friends owe to his character,
to have the whole affair candidly and fully related, whatever facts it
may involve, that may appear of a disagreeable nature to individuals.
The author is confident, that if Captain King could have foreseen, that
any wrong opinion respecting Captain Cook, would have been the
consequence of omitting some circumstances relative to his death; the
goodnatured motive that induced him to be silent, would not have stood a
moment in competition with the superior call of justice to the memory of
his friend. This publication, he is satisfied, would not have been
disapproved of by Captain King, for whose memory he has the highest
esteem, and to whose friendship he is under many obligations. He is
sanguine enough to believe that it will serve to remove a supposition,
in this single instance, injurious to the memory of Captain Cook, who
was no less distinguished for his caution and prudence, than for his
eminent abilities and undaunted resolution.

The late appearance of this Narrative has been owing to the peculiar
situation of the writer, whose domestic residence is at a great distance
from the metropolis, and whose duty frequently calls him from home for
several months together. He has the pleasure of adding, that, in
publishing the following account of Captain Cook's death, he acts in
concurrence with the opinion of some very respectable persons.




Narrative of the Death of Captain Cook


In the month of January, 1779, the "Resolution" and "Discovery" lay
about a fortnight at anchor in the bay of Kerag,e,goo,ah[1]
(Kealakekua), in the Island of Ou-why-ee (Hawaii). During that time, the
ships were most plentifully supplied with provisions by natives, with
whom we lived on the most friendly terms. We were universally treated by
them with kind attention and hospitality; but the respect they paid to
Captain Cook, was little short of adoration. It was, therefore, with
sentiments of the most perfect good-will towards the inhabitants, that
we left the harbour, on the fourth of February. It was Captain Cook's
intention to visit the other islands to leeward, and we stood to the
westward, towards Mowee (Maui), attended by several canoes full of
people, who were willing to accompany us as far as they could, before
they bade us a final adieu.

On the sixth, we were overtaken by a gale of wind; and the next night,
the "Resolution" had the misfortune of springing the head of her
foremast, in such a dangerous manner, that Captain Cook was obliged to
return to Keragegooah (Kealakekua), in order to have it repaired; for we
could find no other convenient harbour on the island. The same gale had
occasioned much distress among some canoes, that had paid a visit from
the shore. One of them, with two men and a child on board, was picked up
by the "Resolution," and rescued from destruction: the men, having
toiled hard all night, in attempting to reach the land, were so much
exhausted, that they could hardly mount the ship's side. When they got
upon the quarter-deck, they burst into tears, and seemed much affected
with the dangerous situation from which they had escaped; but the little
child appeared lively and cheerful. One of the "Resolution's" boats was
also so fortunate as to save a man and two women, whose canoe had been
upset by the violence of the waves. They were brought on board, and,
with the others, partook of the kindness and humanity of Captain Cook.

On the morning of Wednesday, the tenth, we were within a few miles of
the harbour; and were soon joined by several canoes, in which appeared
many of our old acquaintances; who seemed to have come to welcome us
back. Among them was Coo,aha[2] (Kuaha), a priest: he had brought a
small pig, and some cocoa nuts in his hand, which, after having chaunted
a few sentences, he presented to Captain Clerke. He then left us, and
hastened on board the "Resolution," to perform the same friendly
ceremony before Captain Cook. Having but light winds all that day, we
could not gain the harbour. In the afternoon, a chief of the first rank,
and nearly related to Kariopoo (Kalaniopuu), paid us a visit on board
the "Discovery." His name was Ka,mea,mea (Kamehameha): he was dressed in
a very rich feathered cloke, which he seemed to have brought for sale,
but would part with it for nothing except iron daggers. These, the
chiefs, some time before our departure, had preferred to every other
article; for having received a plentiful supply of hatchets and other
tools, they began to collect a store of warlike instruments. Kameamea
(Kamehameha) procured nine daggers for his cloke, and being pleased with
his reception, he and his attendants slept on board that night.

In the morning of the eleventh of February, the ships anchored again in
Keragegooah bay (Kealakekua Bay), and preparation was immediately made
for landing the "Resolution's" foremast. We were visited but by few of
the Indians, because there were but few in the bay. On our departure,
those belonging to other parts, had repaired to their several
habitations, and were again to collect from various quarters, before we
could expect to be surrounded by such multitudes as we had once seen in
that harbour. In the afternoon I walked about a mile into the country,
to visit an Indian friend, who had, a few days before, come near twenty
miles, in a small canoe, to see me, while the ship lay becalmed. As the
canoe had not left us long before a gale of wind came on, I was alarmed
for the consequence; however, I had the pleasure to find that my friend
had escaped unhurt, though not without some difficulties. I take notice
of this short excursion, merely because it afforded me an opportunity
of observing, that there appeared no change in the disposition or
behaviour of the inhabitants. I saw nothing that could induce me to
think, that they were displeased with our return, or jealous of the
intention of our second visit. On the contrary, that abundant good
nature which had always characterised them, seemed still to glow in
every bosom, and to animate every countenance.

The next day, February the twelfth, the ships were put under a taboo, by
the chiefs, a solemnity, it seems, that was requisite to be observed
before Kariopoo (Kalaniopuu), the king, paid his first visit to Captain
Cook, after his return. He waited upon him the same day, on board the
"Resolution," attended by a large train, some of which bore the presents
designed for Captain Cook, who received him in his usual friendly
manner, and gave him several articles in return. This amicable ceremony
being settled, the taboo was dissolved, matters went on in the usual
train, and the next day, February the thirteenth, we were visited by the
natives in great numbers; the "Resolution's" mast was landed, and the
astronomical observatories erected on their former situation. I landed,
with another gentleman, at the town of Kavaroah (Kaawaloa), where we
found a great number of canoes, just arrived from different parts of the
island, and the Indians busy in constructing temporary huts on the
beach, for their residence during the stay of the ships. On our return
on board the "Discovery," we learned that an Indian had been detected in
stealing the armourer's tongs from the forge, for which he received a
pretty severe flogging, and was sent out of the ship. Notwithstanding
the example made of this man, in the afternoon another had the audacity
to snatch the tongs and a chizel from the same place, with which he
jumped overboard, and swam for the shore. The master and a midshipman
were instantly dispatched after him, in the small cutter. The Indian
seeing himself pursued, made for a canoe: his countrymen took him on
board, and paddled as swift as they could towards the shore; we fired
several muskets at them, but to no effect, for they soon got out of the
reach of our shot. Pareah (Palea), one of the chiefs, who was at that
time on board the "Discovery," understanding what had happened,
immediately went ashore, promising to bring back the stolen goods. Our
boat was so far distanced, in chasing the canoe which had taken the
chief on board, that he had time to make his escape into the country.
Captain Cook, who was then on shore, endeavoured to intercept his
landing; but it seems, that he was led out of the way by some of the
natives, who had officiously intruded themselves as guides. As the
master was approaching near the landing-place, he was met by some of the
Indians in a canoe; they had brought back the tongs and chizel, together
with another article, that we had not missed, which happened to be the
lid of the water-cask. Having recovered these things, he was returning
on board, when he was met by the "Resolution's" pinnace, with five men
in her, who, without any orders, had come from the observatories to his
assistance. Being thus unexpectedly reinforced, he thought himself
strong enough to insist upon having the thief, or the canoe which took
him in, delivered up as reprizals. With that view he turned back; and
having found the canoe on the beach, he was preparing to launch it into
the water when Pareah (Palea) made his appearance, and insisted upon his
not taking it away, as it was his property. The officer not regarding
him, the chief seized upon him, pinioned his arms behind, and held him
by the hair of his head: on which, one of the sailors struck him with an
oar: Pareah (Palea) instantly quitted the officer, snatched the oar out
of the man's hand, and snapped it in two across his knee. At length, the
multitude began to attack our people with stones. They made some
resistance, but were soon overpowered, and obliged to swim for safety to
the small cutter, which lay farther out than the pinnace. The officers,
not being expert swimmers, retreated to a small rock in the water, where
they were closely pursued by the Indians. One man darted a broken oar at
the master; but his foot slipping at the time, he missed him, which
fortunately saved that officer's life. At last, Pareah (Palea)
interfered, and put an end to their violence. The Gentlemen, knowing
that his presence was their only defense against the fury of the
natives, entreated him to stay with them, till they could get off in the
boats; but that he refused, and left them. The master went to seek
assistance from the party at the observatories; but the midshipman chose
to remain in the pinnace. He was very rudely treated by the mob, who
plundered the boat of everything that was loose on board, and then began
to knock her to pieces, for the sake of the ironwork: but Pareah (Palea)
fortunately returned in time to prevent her destruction. He had met the
other gentleman on his way to the observatories, and suspecting his
errand, had forced him to return. He dispersed the crowd again, and
desired the gentlemen to return on board; they represented, that all the
oars had been taken out of the boat: on which he brought some of them
back, and the gentlemen were glad to get off, without further
molestation. They had not proceeded far, before they were overtaken by
Pareah (Palea), in a canoe; he delivered the midshipman's cap, which had
been taken from him in the scuffle, joined noses with them, in token of
reconciliation, and was anxious to know, if Captain Cook would kill him
for what had happened. They assured him of the contrary, and made signs
of friendship to him in return. He then left them, and paddled over to
the town of Kavaroah (Kaawaloa), and that was the last time we ever saw
him. Captain Cook returned on board soon after, much displeased with the
whole of this disagreeable business; and the same night, sent a
lieutenant on board the "Discovery," to learn the particulars of it, as
it had originated in that ship.

It was remarkable, that in the midst of the hurry and confusion
attending this affair, Kanynah[3] (Kanaina), a chief who had always been
on terms particularly friendly with us, came from the spot where it
happened, with a hog to sell on board the "Discovery:" it was of an
extraordinary large size, and he demanded for it a pahowa (pahoa), or
dagger, of an unusual length. He pointed to us, that it must be as long
as his arm. Captain Clerke not having one of that length, told him, he
would get one made for him by the morning; with which being satisfied,
he left the hog, and went ashore without making any stay with us. It
will not be altogether foreign to the subject, to mention a
circumstance, that happened to-day on board the "Resolution." An Indian
Chief asked Captain Cook at his table, if he was a Tata Toa (Hakaka
Koa); which means a fighting man, or a soldier. Being answered in the
affirmative, he desired to see his wounds: Captain Cook held out his
right-hand, which had a scar upon it, dividing the thumb from the
finger, the whole length of the metacarpal bones. The Indian, being thus
convinced of his being a Toa (Koa), put the same question to another
gentleman present, but he happened to have none of those distinguishing
marks: the chief then said, that he himself was a Toa (Koa), and showed
the scars of some wounds he had received in battle. Those who were on
duty at the observatories, were disturbed during the night, with shrill
and melancholy sounds, issuing from the adjacent villages, which they
took to be the lamentations of the women. Perhaps the quarrel between
us, might have filled their minds with apprehensions for the safety of
their husbands: but, be that as it may, their mournful cries struck the
sentinels with unusual awe and terror.

To widen the breach between us, some of the Indians in the night, took
away the "Discovery's" large cutter, which lay swamped at the buoy of
one of her anchors: they had carried her off so quietly, that we did not
miss her till the morning, Sunday, February the fourteenth. Captain
Clerke lost no time in waiting upon Captain Cook, to acquaint him with
the accident; he returned on board, with orders for the launch and small
cutter to go, under the command of the second lieutenant, and lie off
the east point of the bay, in order to intercept all canoes that might
attempt to get out; and, if he found it necessary, to fire upon them. At
the same time, the third lieutenant of the "Resolution," with the launch
and small cutter, was sent on the same service, to the opposite point of
the bay; and the master was dispatched in the large cutter, in pursuit
of a double canoe, already under sail, making the best of her way out of
the harbour. He soon came up with her, and by firing a few muskets,
drove her on shore, and the Indians left her: this happened to be the
canoe of Omea (Mea), a man who bore the title of Orono (Lono). He was on
board himself, and it would have been fortunate, if our people had
secured him, for his person was held as sacred as that of the king.
During this time, Captain Cook was preparing to go ashore himself, at
the town of Kavaroah (Kaawaloa), in order to secure the person of
Kariopoo (Kalaniopuu), before he should have time to withdraw himself to
another part of the island, out of our reach. This appeared the most
effectual step that could be taken on the present occasion, for the
recovery of the boat. It was the measure he had invariably pursued, in
similar cases, at other islands in these seas, and it had always been
attended with the desired success: in fact, it would be difficult to
point out any other mode of proceeding on these emergencies, likely to
attain the object in view. We had reason to suppose, that the king and
his attendants had fled when the alarm was first given; in that case, it
was Captain Cook's intention to secure the large canoes which were
hauled upon the beach. He left the ship about seven o'clock, attended by
the lieutenant of marines, a serjeant, corporal, and seven private men:
the pinnace's crew were also armed, and under the command of Mr.
Roberts. As they rowed towards the shore, Captain Cook ordered the
launch to leave her station at the west point of the bay, in order to
assist his own boat. This is a circumstance worthy of notice; for it
clearly shows, that he was not unapprehensive of meeting with resistance
from the natives; or unmindful of the necessary preparation for the
safety of himself and his people. I will venture to say, that from the
appearance of things, just at that time, there was not one, beside
himself, who judged that such precaution was absolutely requisite; so
little did his conduct on the occasion bear the marks of rashness, or a
precipitate self-confidence! He landed, with the marines, at the upper
end of the town of Kavaroah (Kaawaloa): the Indians immediately flocked
round, as usual, and showed him the customary marks of respect, by
prostrating themselves before him. There were no signs of hostilities,
or much alarm among them. Captain Cook, however, did not seem willing to
trust to appearances; but was particularly attentive to the disposition
of the marines, and to have them kept clear of the crowd. He first
enquired for the king's sons, two youths[4] who were much attached to
him, and generally his companions on board. Messengers being sent for
them, they soon came to him, and informing him that their father was
asleep, at a house not far from them, he accompanied them thither, and
took the marines along with them. As he passed along, the natives every
where prostrated themselves before him, and seemed to have lost no part
of that respect they had always shown to his person. He was joined by
several chiefs, among whom was Kanynah (Kanaina), and his brother
Koohowrooah (Kuhaulua?). They kept the crowd in order, according to
their usual custom; and being ignorant of his intention in coming on
shore, frequently asked him if he wanted any hogs, or other provisions;
he told them that he did not, and that his business was to see the king.
When he arrived at the house he ordered some of the Indians to go in,
and inform Kariopoo (Kalaniopuu), that he waited without to speak with
him. They came out two or three times, and instead of returning any
answer from the king, presented some pieces of red cloth to him, which
made Captain Cook suspect that he was not in the house; he therefore
desired the lieutenant of marines to go in. The lieutenant found the old
man just awaked from sleep, and seemingly alarmed at the message; but he
came out without hesitation. Captain Cook took him by the hand, and in a
friendly manner, asked him to go on board, to which he very readily
consented. Thus far matters appeared in a favourable train, and the
natives did not seem much alarmed or apprehensive of hostility on our
side; at which Captain Cook expressed himself a little surprized,
saying, that as the inhabitants of that town appeared innocent of
stealing the cutter, he should not molest them, but that he must get the
king on board. Kariopoo (Kalaniopuu) sat down before his door, and was
surrounded by a great crowd: Kanynah (Kanaina) and his brother were both
very active in keeping order among them. In a little time, however, the
Indians were observed arming themselves with long spears, clubs, and
daggers, and putting on thick mats, which they use as armour. This
hostile appearance increased, and became more alarming, on the arrival
of two men in a canoe from the opposite side of the bay, with the news
of a chief, called Kareemoo (Kalimo), having been killed by one of the
"Discovery's" boats, in their passage across: they had also delivered
this account to each of the ships. Upon that information, the women, who
were sitting upon the beach at their breakfasts, and conversing
familiarly with our people in the boats, retired, and a confused murmur
spread through the crowd. An old priest came to Captain Cook, with a
cocoa nut in his hand, which he held out to him as a present, at the
same time singing very loud. He was often desired to be silent, but in
vain: he continued importunate and troublesome, and there was no such
thing as getting rid of him or his noise: it seemed, as if he meant to
divert their attention from his countrymen, who were growing more
tumultuous, and arming themselves in every quarter. Captain Cook, being
at the same time surrounded by a great crowd, thought his situation
rather hazardous: he therefore ordered the lieutenant of marines to
march his small party to the water-side, where the boats lay within a
few yards of the shore: the Indians readily made a lane for them to
pass, and did not offer to interrupt them. The distance they had to go
might be about fifty or sixty yards; Captain Cook followed, having hold
of Kariopoo's (Kalaniopuu's) hand, who accompanied him very willingly:
he was attended by his wife, two sons, and several chiefs. The
troublesome old priest followed, making the same savage noise. Keowa
(Keoua)[5], the younger son, went directly into the pinnace, expecting
his father to follow; but just as he arrived at the water-side, his wife
threw her arms about his neck, and, with the assistance of two chiefs,
forced him to sit down by the side of a double canoe. Captain Cook
expostulated with them, but to no purpose: they would not suffer the
king to proceed, telling him, that he would be put to death if he went
on board the ship. Kariopoo (Kalaniopuu), whose conduct seemed entirely
resigned to the will of others, hung down his head, and appeared much
distressed.

While the king was in this situation, a chief, well known to us, of the
name of Coho (Koho), was observed lurking near, with an iron dagger,
partly concealed under his cloke, seemingly, with the intention of
stabbing Captain Cook, or the lieutenant of marines. The latter proposed
to fire at him, but Captain Cook would not permit it. Coho (Koho)
closing upon them, obliged the officer to strike him with his piece,
which made him retire. Another Indian laid hold of the serjeant's
musket, and endeavoured to wrench it from him, but was prevented by the
lieutenant's making a blow at him. Captain Cook, seeing the tumult
increase, and the Indians growing more daring and resolute, observed,
that if he were to take the king off by force, he could not do it
without sacrificing the lives of many of his people. He then paused a
little, and was on the point of giving his order to reimbark, when a man
threw a stone at him; which he returned with a discharge of small shot,
(with which one barrel of his double piece was loaded). The man, having
a thick mat before him, received little or no hurt; he brandished his
spear, and threatened to dart it at Captain Cook, who being still
unwilling to take away his life, instead of firing with ball, knocked
him down with his musket. He expostulated strongly with the most forward
of the crowd, upon their turbulent behaviour. He had given up all
thoughts of getting the king on board, as it appeared impracticable; and
his care was then only to act on the defensive, and to secure a safe
embarkation for his small party, which was closely pressed by a body of
several thousand people. Keowa (Keoua), the king's son, who was in the
pinnace, being alarmed on hearing the first firing, was, at his own
entreaty, put on shore again; for even at that time, Mr. Roberts, who
commanded her, did not apprehend that Captain Cook's person was in any
danger: otherwise he would have detained the prince, which, no doubt,
would have been a great check on the Indians. One man was observed,
behind a double canoe, in the action of darting his spear at Captain
Cook, who was forced to fire at him in his own defence, but happened to
kill another close to him, equally forward in the tumult: the serjeant
observing that he had missed the man he aimed at, received orders to
fire at him, which he did, and killed him. By this time, the impetuosity
of the Indians was somewhat repressed; they fell back in a body, and
seemed staggered; but being pushed on by those behind, they returned to
the charge, and poured a volley of stones among the marines, who,
without waiting for orders, returned it with a general discharge of
musketry, which was instantly followed by a fire from the boats. At this
Captain Cook was heard to express his astonishment: he waved his hand to
the boats, called to them to cease firing, and to come nearer in to
receive the marines. Mr. Roberts immediately brought the pinnace as
close to the shore as he could, without grounding, notwithstanding the
showers of stones that fell among the people; but Mr. John Williamson,
the lieutenant, who commanded in the launch, instead of pulling in to
the assistance of Captain Cook, withdrew his boat further off, at the
moment that everything seems to have depended upon the timely exertions
of those in the boats. By his own account, he mistook the signal: but be
that as it may, this circumstance appears to me, to have decided the
fatal turn of the affair, and to have removed every chance which
remained with Captain Cook, of escaping with his life. The business of
saving the marines out of the water, in consequence of that, fell
altogether upon the pinnace; which thereby became so much crowded, that
the crew were, in a great measure, prevented from using their fire-arms,
or giving what assistance they otherwise might have done, to Captain
Cook; so that he seems, at the most critical point of time, to have
wanted the assistance of both boats, owing to the removal of the launch.
For notwithstanding that they kept up a fire on the crowd from the
situation to which they removed in that boat, the fatal confusion which
ensued on her being withdrawn, to say the least of it, must have
prevented the full effect, that the prompt co-operation of the two
boats, according to Captain Cook's orders, must have had, towards the
preservation of himself and his people. At that time, it was to the
boats alone, that Captain Cook had to look for his safety; for when the
marines had fired, the Indians rushed among them, and forced them into
the water, where four of them were killed: their lieutenant was wounded,
but fortunately escaped, and was taken up by the pinnace. Captain Cook
was then the only one remaining on the rock: he was observed making for
the pinnace, holding his left-hand against the back of his head, to
guard it from the stones, and carrying his musket under the other arm.
An Indian was seen following him, but with caution and timidity; for he
stopped once or twice, as if undetermined to proceed. At last he
advanced upon him unawares, and with a large club,[6] or common stake,
gave him a blow on the back of the head, and then precipitately
retreated. The stroke seemed to have stunned Captain Cook: he staggered
a few paces, then fell on his hand and one knee, and dropped his musket.
As he was rising, and before he could recover his feet, another Indian
stabbed him in the back of the neck with an iron dagger. He then fell
into a bite of water about knee deep, where others crowded upon him, and
endeavoured to keep him under: but struggling very strongly with them,
he got his head up, and casting his look towards the pinnace, seemed to
solicit assistance. Though the boat was not above five or six yards
distant from him, yet from the crowded and confused state of the crew,
it seems, it was not in their power to save him. The Indians got him
under again, but in deeper water: he was, however, able to get his head
up once more, and being almost spent in the struggle, he naturally
turned to the rock, and was endeavouring to support himself by it, when
a savage gave him a blow with a club, and he was seen alive no more.
They hauled him up lifeless on the rocks, where they seemed to take a
savage pleasure in using every barbarity to his dead body, snatching the
daggers out of each other's hands, to have the horrid satisfaction of
piercing the fallen victim of their barbarous rage.

I need make no reflection on the great loss we suffered on this
occasion, or attempt to describe what we felt. It is enough to say, that
no man was ever more beloved or admired; and it is truly painful to
reflect, that he seems to have fallen a sacrifice merely for want of
being properly supported; a fate, singularly to be lamented, as having
fallen to his lot, who had ever been conspicuous for his care of those
under his command, and who seemed, to the last, to pay as much attention
to their preservation, as to that of his own life.

If any thing could have added to the shame and indignation universally
felt on the occasion, it was to find, that his remains had been
deserted, and left exposed on the beach, although they might have been
brought off. It appears, from the information of four or five
midshipmen, who arrived on the spot at the conclusion of the fatal
business, that the beach was then almost entirely deserted by the
Indians, who at length had given way to the fire of the boats, and
dispersed through the town: so that there seemed no great obstacle to
prevent the recovery of Captain Cook's body; but the lieutenant returned
on board without making the attempt. It is unnecessary to dwell longer
on this painful subject, and to relate the complaints and censures that
fell on the conduct of the lieutenant. It will be sufficient to observe,
that they were so loud, as to oblige Captain Clerke publicly to notice
them, and to take the depositions of his accusers down in writing. The
Captain's bad state of health and approaching dissolution, it is
supposed, induced him to destroy these papers a short time before his
death.

It is a painful task, to be obliged to notice circumstances, which seem
to reflect upon the character of any man. A strict regard to truth,
however, compelled me to the insertion of these facts, which I have
offered merely as facts, without presuming to connect with them any
comment of my own: esteeming it the part of a faithful historian, "to
extenuate nothing, nor set down ought in malice."

The fatal accident happened about eight o'clock in the morning, about an
hour after Captain Cook landed. It did not seem, that the king, or his
sons, were witnesses to it; but it is supposed that they withdrew in the
midst of the tumult. The principal actors were the other chiefs, many of
them the king's relations and attendants: the man who stabbed him with
the dagger was called Nooah (Nuaa). I happened to be the only one who
recollected his person, from having on a former occasion mentioned his
name in the journal I kept. I was induced to take particular notice of
him, more from his personal appearance than any other consideration,
though he was of high rank, and a near relation of the king: he was
stout and tall, with a fierce look and demeanour, and one who united in
his figure the two qualities of strength and agility, in a greater
degree, than ever I remembered to have seen before in any other man. His
age might be about thirty, and by the white scurf on his skin, and his
sore eyes, he appeared to be a hard drinker of Kava (awa). He was a
constant companion of the king, with whom I first saw him, when he paid
a visit to Captain Clerke. The chief who first struck Captain Cook with
the club, was called Karimano-craha[7] (Kalaimanokahoowaha), but I did
not know him by his name. These circumstances I learnt of honest
Kaireekea (Keliikia), the priest; who added, that they were both held in
great esteem on account of that action; neither of them came near us
afterwards. When the boats left the shore, the Indians carried away the
dead body of Captain Cook and those of the marines, to the rising
ground, at the back of the town, where we could plainly see them with
our glasses from the ships.

This most melancholy accident, appears to have been altogether
unexpected and unforeseen, as well on the part of the natives as
ourselves. I never saw sufficient reason to induce me to believe, that
there was any thing of design, or a pre-concerted plan on their side, or
that they purposely sought to quarrel with us: thieving, which gave rise
to the whole, they were equally guilty of, in our first and second
visits. It was the cause of every misunderstanding that happened between
us: their petty thefts were generally overlooked, but sometimes slightly
punished: the boat, which they at last ventured to take away, was an
object of no small magnitude to people in our situation, who could not
possibly replace her, and therefore not slightly to be given up. We had
no other chance of recovering her, but by getting the person of the king
into our possession: on our attempting to do that, the natives became
alarmed for his safety, and naturally opposed those whom they deemed
his enemies. In the sudden conflict that ensued, we had the unspeakable
misfortune of losing our excellent Commander, in the manner already
related. It is in this light the affair has always appeared to me, as
entirely accidental, and not in the least owing to any previous offence
received, or jealousy of our second visit entertained by the natives.

Pareah (Palea) seems to have been the principal instrument in bringing
about this fatal disaster. We learnt afterwards, that it was he who had
employed some people to steal the boat: the king did not seem to be
privy to it, or even apprized of what had happened, till Captain Cook
landed.

It was generally remarked, that at first, the Indians shewed great
resolution in facing our fire-arms; but it was entirely owing to
ignorance of their effect. They thought that their thick mats would
defend them from a ball, as well as from a stone; but being soon
convinced of their error, yet still at a loss to account how such
execution was done among them, they had recourse to a stratagem, which,
though it answered no other purpose, served to show their ingenuity and
quickness of invention. Observing the flashes of the muskets, they
naturally concluded, that water would counteract their effect, and
therefore, very sagaciously dipped their mats, or armour in the sea,
just as they came on to face our people: but finding this last resource
to fail them, they soon dispersed, and left the beach entirely clear. It
was an object they never neglected, even at the greatest hazard, to
carry off their slain; a custom, probably, owing to the barbarity with
which they treat the dead body of an enemy, and the trophies they make
of his bones.[8]




Some Particulars Concerning the Life and Character of Captain Cook


Captain Cook was born at Marton, in Cleaveland, in the county of York, a
small village, distant five miles south-east from Stockton. His name is
found in the parish register in the year 1729 (so that Captain King was
mistaken, in placing the time of his birth in the year 1727). The
cottage in which his father formerly lived, is now decayed, but the spot
where it stood is still shewn to strangers. A gentleman is now living in
that neighbourhood, with whom the old man formerly worked as a common
day-labourer in the fields. However, though placed in this humble
station, he gave his son a common school education, and at an early age,
placed him apprentice with one Mr. Saunderson, a shopkeeper at Staith
(always pronounced Steers), a small fishing-town on the Yorkshire coast,
about nine miles to the northward of Whitby. The business is now carried
on by the son of Mr. Saunderson, in the same shop, which I had the
curiosity to visit about a year and a half ago. In that situation young
Cook did not continue long, before he quitted it in disgust, and, as
often happens in the like cases, betook himself to the sea. Whitby being
a neighbouring sea-port, readily offered him an opportunity to pursue
his inclination; and there we find he bound himself apprentice, for nine
years, in the coal trade, to one Mr. John Walker, now living in South
Whitby. In his employ, he afterwards became mate of a ship; in which
station having continued some time, he had the offer of being master,
which he refused, as it seems he had at that time turned his thoughts
towards the navy. Accordingly, at the breaking out of the war in 1755,
he entered on board the "Eagle," of fifty-four guns, and in a short time
after, Sir Hugh Palliser was appointed to the command of that ship, a
circumstance that must not be passed unnoticed, as it proved the
foundation of the future fame and fortune of Captain Cook. His uncommon
merit did not long escape the observation of that discerning officer,
who promoted him to the quarter-deck, and ever after patronized him with
such zeal and attention, as must reflect the highest honour upon his
character. To Sir Hugh Palliser is the world indebted, for having first
noticed in an obscure situation, and afterwards brought forward in life,
the greatest nautical genius that ever any age or country has produced.
In the year 1758, we find him master of the "Northumberland," then in
America, under the command of Lord Colville. It was there, he has been
heard to say, that during a hard winter he first read Euclid, and
applied himself to the study of astronomy and the mathematics, in which
he made no inconsiderable progress, assisted only by his own ingenuity
and industry. At the time he thus found means to cultivate and improve
his mind, and to supply the deficiency of an early education, he was
constantly engaged in the most busy and active scenes of the war in
America. At the siege of Quebec, Sir Hugh Palliser made him known to Sir
Charles Saunders, who committed to his charge the conducting of the
boats to the attack of Mount Morenci, and the embarkation that scaled
the heights of Abraham. He was also employed to examine the passage of
the river St. Laurence, and to lay buoys for the direction of the men of
war. In short, in whatever related to the reduction of that place in the
naval department, he had a principal share, and conducted himself so
well throughout the whole, as to recommend himself to the commander in
chief. At the conclusion of the war, Sir Hugh Palliser having the
command on the Newfoundland station, he appointed him to survey that
Island and the coast of Labradore, and gave him the "Grenville" brig for
that purpose. How well he performed that service, the charts he has
published afford sufficient testimony. In that employment he continued
till the year 1767, when the well known voyage to the South Sea, for
observing the transit of Venus, and making discoveries in that vast
ocean was planned. Lord Hawke, who then presided at the Admiralty, was
strongly solicited to give the command of that expedition to Mr.
Alexander Dalrymple; but through the interest of his friend Sir Hugh
Palliser, Captain Cook obtained the appointment, together with the rank
of lieutenant. It was stipulated, that on his return, he should, if he
chose it, again hold the place of surveyor of Newfoundland, and that his
family should be provided for, in case of an accident to himself.

He sailed from England in the "Endeavour," in the year 1768, accompanied
by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, and returned in 1771; after having
circumnavigated the globe, made several important discoveries in the
South Sea, and explored the islands of New Zealand, and great part of
the coast of New Holland. The skill and ability with which he conducted
that expedition, ranked his name high as a navigator, and could not fail
of recommending him to that great patron of naval merit, the Earl of
Sandwich, who then presided at the board of Admiralty. He was promoted
to the rank of master and commander, and a short time afterwards,
appointed to conduct another expedition to the Pacific Ocean, in search
of the supposed Southern continent, and added many valuable discoveries
to those he had before made in the South Sea. His own account of it is
before the public, and he is no less admired for the accuracy and
extensive knowledge which he has displayed in that work, than for his
skill and intrepidity in conducting the expedition. On his return, he
was promoted to the rank of post-captain, and appointed one of the
captains of Greenwich hospital. In that Retirement he did not continue
long: for an active life best suiting his disposition, he offered his
services to conduct a third expedition to the South Sea, which was then
in agitation, in order to explore a northern passage from Europe to
Asia: in this he unfortunately lost his life, but not till he had fully
accomplished the object of the voyage.

The character of Captain Cook will be best exemplified by the services
he has performed, which are universally known, and have ranked his name
above that of any navigator of ancient or of modern times. Nature had
endowed him with a mind vigorous and comprehensive, which in his riper
years he had cultivated with care and industry. His general knowledge
was extensive and various: in that of his own profession he was
unequalled. With a clear judgment, strong masculine sense, and the most
determined resolution; with a genius particularly turned for enterprize,
he pursued his object with unshaken perseverence:--vigilent and active
in an eminent degree:--cool and intrepid among dangers; patient and firm
under difficulties and distress; fertile in expedients; great and
original in all his designs; active and resolved in carrying them into
execution. These qualities rendered him the animating spirit of the
expedition: in every situation, he stood unrivalled and alone; on him
all eyes were turned; he was our leading-star, which at its setting,
left us involved in darkness and despair.

His constitution was strong, his mode of living temperate: why Captain
King should not suppose temperance as great a virtue in him as in any
other man, I am unable to guess. He had no repugnance to good living; he
always kept a good table, though he could bear the reverse without
murmuring. He was a modest man, and rather bashful; of an agreeable
lively conversation, sensible and intelligent. In his temper he was
somewhat hasty, but of a disposition the most friendly, benevolent, and
humane. His person was above six feet high, and though a good-looking
man, he was plain both in address and appearance. His head was small,
his hair, which was a dark brown, he wore tied behind. His face was full
of expression, his nose exceedingly well-shaped, his eyes, which were
small and of a brown cast, were quick and piercing; his eyebrows
prominent, which gave his countenance altogether an air of austerity.

He was beloved by his people, who looked up to him as to a father, and
obeyed his commands with alacrity. The confidence we placed in him was
unremitting; our admiration of his great talents unbounded; our esteem
for his good qualities affectionate and sincere.

In exploring unknown countries, the dangers he had to encounter were
various and uncommon. On such occasions, he always displayed great
presence of mind, and a steady perseverance in pursuit of his object.
The acquisition he has made to our knowledge of the globe is immense,
besides improving the art of navigation, and enriching the science of
natural philosophy.

He was remarkably distinguished for the activity of his mind: it was
that which enabled him to pay an unwearied attention to every object of
the service. The strict economy he observed in the expenditure of the
ship's stores, and the unremitting care he employed for the preservation
of the health of his people, were the causes that enabled him to
prosecute discoveries in remote parts of the globe, for such a length of
time as had been deemed impracticable by former navigators. The method
he discovered for preserving the health of seamen in long voyages, will
transmit his name to posterity as the friend and benefactor of mankind:
the success which attended it, afforded this truly great man more
satisfaction, than the distinguished fame that attended his discoveries.

England has been unanimous in her tribute of applause to his virtues,
and all Europe has borne testimony to his merit. There is hardly a
corner of the earth, however remote and savage, that will not long
remember his benevolence and humanity. The grateful Indian, in time to
come, pointing to the herds grazing his fertile plains, will relate to
his children how the first stock of them was introduced into the
country; and the name of Cook will be remembered among those benign
spirits, whom they worship as the source of every good, and the fountain
of every blessing.

It may not be amiss to observe, that the plate engraved by Sherwin,
after a painting by Dance, is a most excellent likeness of Captain Cook;
and more to be valued, as it is the only one I have seen that bears any
resemblance to him.




Observations Respecting the Introduction of the Venereal Disease Into
the Sandwich Islands


This publication affording a convenient opportunity, I embrace it, to
offer a few remarks upon a subject in some degree affecting the
reputation of the late voyages to the South Sea Islands. If we for a
moment suppose, that they have been the means of disseminating the
venereal disease among the inhabitants, the evil is of such a magnitude,
that we are induced to wish they had never been undertaken. For who
would not sooner remain ignorant of the interesting discoveries which
have been made, than bear the reflection of their having been attended
with such an irreparable injury to a happy and uncontaminated race of
people!

It is a point of dispute between Captain Wallis and Mons. Bougainville,
which of their ships it was, that introduced the disease to Otaheite.
And we find, that Captain Cook was apprehensive of his people having
left it at the Friendly Islands. Without enquiring into the grounds of
conviction they had in former voyages, I am strongly inclined to
believe, from my observations in the last, that it is a subject about
which they are very liable to be deceived; and that what is laid down as
positive fact, could be no more than matter of opinion.

In the last voyage, both Captains Cook and King were of opinion, that
the inhabitants of Sandwich Islands received that distemper from our
people. The great deference I pay to their judgment on every occasion,
will hardly allow me to dissent from it in the present instance; and yet
I must be allowed to say, that the same evidence which proved convincing
to them in this case, did by no means appear so to me, and I will
endeavour to assign my reasons. When we first discovered Sandwich
Islands, in the month of January, 1778, the ships anchored at two of
them (viz. Atowai (Kauai) and Neehaw (Niihau)) where parties were sent
ashore for water, and to purchase provisions of the natives. On this
occasion, I must bear my testimony (for I was then in the "Resolution")
to the very particular care taken by Captain Cook, to prevent any of his
people who were not in perfect health, from having communication with
the shore, and also to prevent women from coming on board the ships.
That this humane precaution answered the intended purpose, we had great
reason to believe; for not one of those who did go on shore was
afterwards in the surgeon's list, or known to have any complaint; which
was the most convincing proof we could have, of their being well at the
time. We therefore were under no apprehensions on this head, when we
visited these islands a second time, about eleven months from our first
discovering them. We then fell in with two islands, (viz. Mowee (Maui)
and Ouwhyee (Hawaii)) belonging to the group, which we had not seen
before; and very soon found that the venereal disease was not unknown to
the natives. This excited no little concern and astonishment among us,
and made us anxious to learn whether or no, so dreadful a calamity had
been left at Atowai (Kauai) by our ships, and so propagated to these
islands. But the scanty knowledge we had of their language, made this a
matter of great difficulty, and rendered the best intelligence we could
get, but vague and uncertain. While we were cruising off Ouwhyee
(Hawaii), I was told, that some Indians had visited the "Resolution"
with that complaint upon them, and that they seemed to intimate, that
our ships had left it at Atowai (Kauai); whence it had found its way to
this island.

This account, I confess, appeared at once very improbable to me, and
rendered me very desirous of an opportunity to examine some of them
myself: for I found the above story gaining universal belief, and felt
somewhat hurt, that we should take to ourselves the ignominy of such an
imputation, without sufficient proof of its being just. During our stay
at Keragegooah bay (Kealakekua Bay), where we had constant opportunities
of directing our enquiries to the most intelligent of the natives, I met
with none who could give me any information on the subject, nor could I
learn that they had the least idea of our having left it at Atowai
(Kauai), or that it was a new thing amongst them. This circumstance,
added to the very slight reliance, which experience had taught me to
place in any intelligence obtained from the Indians, through the medium
of their language, confirmed me in the opinion I had entertained from
the first, that the meaning of those Indians had been misunderstood on
board the "Resolution." An instance happened soon afterwards which
convinced me, that no credit whatsoever is to be given to such
information. We had not been long arrived at Atowai (Kauai) a second
time, before an Indian came on board the "Discovery," who appeared to
the gentleman who first spoke to him, clearly to charge us with having
left the disease at that island, on our former visit. As I was known to
be an unbeliever, the man was at last referred to me; and, I confess, I
was a little staggered at first with the answers he gave me; but
presently, suspecting from his manner, that he would answer every
question proposed to him in the affirmative, I asked him, if they did
not receive the disease first from Oahoo (Oahu); a neighbouring island,
which we had not touched at, when we were in these parts before: the man
directly answered, that they had; and strenuously persisted in the same,
every time the question was put to him, either by myself, or the
gentleman who had first examined him. Such contradictory accounts as
these, prove nothing, but our ignorance of their language, and
consequently, how apt we are to be misled in enquiries of this sort. I
never put any confidence in them myself, and have often been surprised
to see others put so much. Yet those who have maintained that we left
the disease at Sandwich Islands, have no better foundation than this, to
rest their opinion upon. Whether it be sufficient to support such an
accusation, I will leave others to judge, after what I have related
above; and proceed to point out such other circumstances as tend to
prove, that the disease was not left at these islands by our ships. From
everything we could learn, it appeared, that there is but little
intercourse between Atowai (Kauai) and the islands to windward,
especially Ouwhyee (Hawaii), which is about fifty leagues distant; and
the nearest to Atowai (Kauai), which is Oahoo (Oahu), is five and twenty
leagues. There is generally some misunderstanding between them, and,
excepting for hostile purposes, the inhabitants rarely visit each other.
But were we even to allow, that there is a frequent intercourse between
them, which from the distance alone is highly improbable, yet it is
hardly possible, that the disease should have spread so far, and so
universally, as we found it at Ouwhyee (Hawaii), in the short space of
time which intervened between our first and second visit to the Sandwich
Islands. On the same supposition, it will appear very extraordinary,
that we should have found it more common by far at Ouwhyee (Hawaii) than
at Atowai (Kauai), the place where we are supposed to have first left
it. That this was the case, however, from my situation at that time, as
surgeon of the "Discovery," I am able to pronounce with some certainty.
The priests pretended to be expert at curing it, and seemed to have an
established mode of treatment; which by no means implied, that it was a
recent complaint among them, much less that it was introduced only a few
months before.

Whence, or at what time, the inhabitants of those islands received
disease, or whether or not it be indigenous among them, is what I do not
pretend even to guess: but from the circumstances above-mentioned, I
think myself warranted in saying, that there are by no means sufficient
proofs of our having first introduced it; but that, on the contrary,
there is every reason to believe, that they were afflicted with it
before we discovered those islands.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] I take it for granted, that most of those into whose hands these
pages may fall, have perused Captain Cook's last Voyage, and therefore,
I have all along mentioned the names of the principal actors in this
account, as people with whom they are already acquainted. But as I
differ so much in the orthography of the language of the Sandwich
Islands from that used in the printed Voyage, it becomes necessary for
me to explain the names I use in this narrative, by those already known.
It may appear strange, how we should differ so much; but so it
is:--which is the most accurate, some future visitor may determine.

    Karakakooa     I call Ke,rag,e,goo,ah (Kealakekua)
    Terreeoboo     ----   Kariopoo (Kaleiopuu, better known as Kalaniopuu)
    Kowrowa        ----   Kavaroah (Kaawaloa)
    Kaneecabareea  ----   Kaneekapo,herei (Kanekapulei)
    Maiha maiha    ----   Ka,mea,mea (Kamehameha)

[2] Called Koah by Cook.--Ed.

[3] Called Kaneena by Cook; Kanina by Fornander.--Ed.

[4] Keoua Kuahuula and Keoua Peeale.--Ed.

[5] Probably Keoua Peeale.--Ed.

[6] I have heard one of the gentlemen who were present say, that the
first injury he received was from a dagger, as it is represented in the
Voyage; but, from the account of many others, who were also
eye-witnesses, I am confident, in saying that he was first struck with a
club. I was afterwards confirmed in this, by Kaireekea (Keliikia), the
priest, who particularly mentioned the name of the man who gave him the
blow, as well as that of the chief who afterwards struck him with the
dagger. This is a point not worth disputing about: I mention it, as
being solicitous to be accurate in this account, even in circumstances,
of themselves, not very material.

[7] Fornander II, page 193, identifies a Kalaimanokahoowaha as
Kanaina.--Ed.

[8] A remarkable instance of this I met with at Atowai (Kauai).
Tamataherei (Kamakahelei), the queen of that island, paid us a visit one
day on board the "Discovery," accompanied by her husband Taeoh
(Kaeokulani), and one of her daughters by her former husband Oteeha
(Kiha). [Possibly another name for Kaneoneo, the first husband of
Kamakahelei and father of Lelemahoalani.] The young princess, whose name
was Ore-reemo-horanee (Lelemahoalani), carried in her hand a very
elegant fly-flap, of a curious construction: the upper part of it was
variegated with alternate rings of tortoise shell and human bone, and
the handle, which was well polished, consisted of the greater part of
the os humeri of a chief, called Mahowra (Meheula). He had belonged to
the neighbouring island of Oahoo (Oahu), and, in a hostile descent he
made upon this coast, had been killed by Oteeha (Kiha), who was then
sovereign of Atowai (Kauai). And thus we found Orereemohoranee
(Lelemahoalani) carrying his bones about, as trophies of her father's
victory. The queen set a great value upon it, and was not willing to
part with it for any of our iron ware; but happening to cast her eyes
upon a wash-hand bason of mine, it struck her fancy, and she offered to
exchange; I accepted of her proposal, and the bones of the unfortunate
Mahowra (Meheula) came at last into my possession.




INDEX


  Atowai (_see_ Kauai)


  Clerke, Captain, 6, 9, 10, 15, 16

  Coho (_see_ Koho)

  Cooaha (_see_ Kuaha)

  Cook, Captain, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22

  Cook, Life of Captain James, 18, 19, 20, 21


  Disease, Introduction of in Hawaii, 22, 23, 24


  Hawaii, 5, 23, 24


  Kaawaloa, 5, 7, 9, 10

  Kaeokulani (k), 17

  Kaireekea (_see_ Keliikia)

  Kalaimanokahoowaha (k), 16

  Kalaniopuu (k), 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

  Kaleiopuu (_see_ Kalaniopuu)

  Kalimo (k), 12

  Kamakahelei (w), 17

  Ka,mea,mea (_see_ Kamehameha)

  Kamehameha (k), 5, 6

  Kanaina (k), 9, 11, 16

  Kaneecabareea (_see_ Kanekapulei)

  Kaneena (_see_ Kanaina)

  Kanekapo,herei (_see_ Kanekapulei)

  Kanekapulei (w), 5

  Kaneoneo (k), 17

  Kanina (_see_ Kanaina)

  Kanynah (_see_ Kanaina)

  Karakakooa (_see_ Kealakekua)

  Kareemoo (_see_ Kalimo)

  Karimano,craha (_see_ Kalaimanokahoowaha)

  Kariopoo (_see_ Kalaniopuu)

  Kauai, 17, 22, 23, 24

  Kavaroah (_see_ Kaawaloa)

  Kealakekua, 5, 6, 23

  Keliikia (k), 14, 16

  Keoua Kuahuula (k), 11

  Keoua Peeale (k), 11, 12, 13

  Keowa (_see_ Keona Peeale)

  Kerag,e,goo,ah (_see_ Kealakekua)

  Kiha (_see_ Kaneoneo)

  King, Captain, 4, 22

  Koho (k), 12

  Koohowrooah (_see_ Kuhaulua)

  Kowrowa (_see_ Kaawaloa)

  Kuaha (k), 6

  Kuhaulua (k), 11


  Lelemahoalani (w), 17

  Lono (_see_ Mea)


  Mahowra (_see_ Meheula)

  Maihamaiha (_see_ Kamehameha)

  Maui, 5, 23

  Mea (k), 10

  Meheula (k), 17

  Mowee (_see_ Maui)


  Neehaw (_see_ Niihau)

  Niihau, 22

  Nooah (_see_ Nuaa)

  Nuaa (k), 16


  Oahoo (_see_ Oahu)

  Oahu, 17, 23, 24

  Omea (_see_ Mea)

  Ore,reemo,horanee (_see_ Lelemahoalani)

  Orono (_see_ Lono)

  Oteeha (_see_ Kiha)

  Ou,why,ee (_see_ Hawaii)


  Palea (k), 7, 8, 17

  Pareah (_see_ Palea)


  Roberts, Mr., 10, 13


  Taeoh (_see_ Kaeokulani)

  Tamataherei (_see_ Kamakehelei)

  Terreeoboo (_see_ Kalaniopuu)


  Vessels:
    "Discovery", 6, 7, 9, 12, 17, 23, 24
    "Resolution", 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 22, 23


  Williamson, Mr. John, 13




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Corrections

Following is a list of significant typographical errors that have been
corrected.

- Page 4, "explicity" changed to "explicitly" (so explicitly related).

- Page 10, "Resoluion" changed to "Resolution" (third lieutenant of the
           "Resolution").

- Page 16, "unforseen" changed to "unforeseen" (unexpected and unforeseen).

- Page 18, "the the" changed to "the" (towards the the navy).

- Page 21, "proscute" changed to "prosecute" (enabled him to prosecute).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Narrative of the Death of Captain
James Cook, by David Samwell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEATH OF CAPTAIN JAMES COOK ***

***** This file should be named 34634.txt or 34634.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/3/34634/

Produced by Patrick Hopkins, Cindy Horton, Chris Curnow
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
