The Project Gutenberg EBook of Beethoven, by Thomas Tapper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Beethoven
       The story of a little boy who was forced to practice

Author: Thomas Tapper

Release Date: December 23, 2010 [EBook #34737]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEETHOVEN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                            CHILD'S OWN BOOK
                           of Great Musicians

                               BEETHOVEN

                             [Illustration]

                                   By
                             THOMAS TAPPER

                          THEODORE PRESSER CO.
                          1712 CHESTNUT STREET
                              PHILADELPHIA




                             [Illustration]

                         Directions for Binding


Enclosed in this envelope is the cord and the needle with which to bind
this book. Start in from the outside as shown on the diagram here. Pass
the needle and thread through the center of the book, leaving an end
extend outside, then through to the outside, about 2 inches from the
center; then from the outside to inside 2 inches from the center at the
other end of the book, bringing the thread finally again through the
center, and tie the two ends in a knot, one each side of the cord on the
outside.

                 THEO. PRESSER CO., Pub's., Phila., Pa.




                          HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


This book is one of a series known as the CHILD'S OWN BOOK OF GREAT
MUSICIANS, written by Thomas Tapper, author of "Pictures from the Lives
of the Great Composers for Children," "Music Talks with Children,"
"First Studies in Music Biography," and others.

The sheet of illustrations included herewith is to be cut apart by the
child, and each illustration is to be inserted in its proper place
throughout the book, pasted in the space containing the same number as
will be found under each picture on the sheet. It is not necessary to
cover the entire back of a picture with paste. Put it only on the
corners and place neatly within the lines you will find printed around
each space. Use photographic paste, if possible.

After this play-work is completed there will be found at the back of the
book blank pages upon which the child is to write his own story of the
great musician, based upon the facts and questions found on the previous
pages.

The book is then to be sewed by the child through the center with the
cord found in the enclosed envelope. The book thus becomes the child's
own book.

This series will be found not only to furnish a pleasing and interesting
task for the children, but will teach them the main facts with regard to
the life of each of the great musicians--an educational feature worth
while.

                   *       *       *       *       *

This series of the Child's Own Book of Great Musicians includes at
present a book on each of the following:

    Bach                    Grieg                   Mozart
    Beethoven               Handel                  Nevin
    Brahms                  Haydn                   Schubert
    Chopin                  Liszt                   Schumann
    Dvor√°k                  MacDowell               Tschaikowsky
    Foster                  Mendelssohn             Verdi
                                                    Wagner




                         [Illustration: No. 1]

                         [Illustration: No. 13]

                         [Illustration: No. 8]

                         [Illustration: No. 4]

                         [Illustration: No. 5]

                         [Illustration: No. 3]

                         [Illustration: No. 6]

                         [Illustration: No. 9]




                         [Illustration: No. 7]

                         [Illustration: No. 10]

                         [Illustration: No. 14]

                         [Illustration: No. 15]

                         [Illustration: No. 16]

                         [Illustration: No. 12]

                         [Illustration: No. 11]




                               BEETHOVEN

                       The Story of a Little Boy
                       Who Was Forced to Practice


                         This Book was made by

                       ..........................


                              Philadelphia
                          Theodore Presser Co.
                           1712 Chestnut Str.

              COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THEODORE PRESSER CO.
                       British Copyright Secured
                          Printed in U. S. A.




                             [Illustration]

                                  BORN


                   ..................................

                                  DIED


                   ..................................




          The Story of a Little Boy who was Forced to Practice


Ludwig van Beethoven was born in the lovely town of Bonn, on the River
Rhine, December 16, 1770.

The house in which he spent his boyhood is still standing. We see in the
picture what a pretty, homelike place the house and the yard must have
been. It is now the Beethoven House, or Museum, filled with mementos of
the great composer. There you may see music pages written by him,
letters, medals, instruments; even his ear trumpet is there.

                  [Illustration: THE BEETHOVEN HOUSE]

Beethoven's father was a singer at the Chapel of the Elector. He was not
a good father, for he did not care to work even enough to make his
family comfortable. But the mother loved her boy with all her heart, as
we shall see.

                          [Illustration: No. 3

                          BEETHOVEN'S FATHER]

Ludwig was only four years old when he began to study music. Like
children of to-day he shed many a tear over the first lessons. In the
beginning his father taught him piano and violin, and forced him to
practice. At school he learned, just as we do to-day, reading, writing,
arithmetic, and later on, Latin.

                          [Illustration: No. 4

                           THE FIRST LESSON]

Never again after thirteen, did Ludwig go to school for he had to work
and earn his living.

Do you wonder what kind of a boy he was?

We are told that he was shy and quiet. He talked little and took no
interest in the games that his boy and girl companions played.

While Ludwig was in school he played at a concert for the first time. He
was then eight years old. Two years later he had composed quite a number
of pieces. One of these was printed. It was called _Variations on
Dressler's March_. On the title page of this piece it said:--

                   **********************************
                   * VARIATIONS ON DRESSLER'S MARCH *
                   *  Composed by a Young Amateur   *
                   *      LOUIS VAN BEETHOVEN       *
                   *      Aged ten years. 1780      *
                   **********************************

Then the little boy studied with a teacher named Christian Gottlob
Neefe, who took real interest in him. Neefe did not, as was said of
Beethoven's father, punish the little boy severely to keep him at his
practice, hour after hour.

Often when Neefe had to travel Ludwig took his teacher's place as
organist at the Court. Then with the organ lessons there were other
lessons in Harmony. So rapidly did the boy improve that his teacher said
one day:

"If he goes on as he has begun, he will some day be a second Mozart."

Our young hero of thirteen was surely busy every hour of the day. He
played in an orchestra, as accompanist. He gave lessons, played the
organ in church, studied the violin, and kept up his work in
composition. He always kept a note-book for musical ideas.

Most every child in these days has more and better opportunities than
had the great Beethoven when he was a child. Here is a picture of the
funny old organ in the Minorite Church of Bonn upon which Beethoven
played when he was a little boy.

                          [Illustration: No. 5

                           BEETHOVEN'S ORGAN]

Look at the funny stops at the top and compare it with the best organ in
your own town. This is little better than a toy beside our fine organs
of to-day,--yet it was the best that Beethoven had to practice upon.

When Neefe said that he would probably be a second Mozart the words
filled Ludwig with a great desire. On his sixteenth birthday what do you
think happened? Why, he set out from Bonn to Vienna, where Mozart lived.

But scarcely had he begun to feel at home in Vienna when news came to
him that his mother was ill. She had always been a good mother, kind of
heart, great of hope for her little boy, and probably she sympathized
with the hard lot that made him have to work so early in life. When he
learned of her sickness he hastened to Bonn.

Who was happier, he said to one of his friends, than I, so long as I was
able to speak the sweet name of Mother and know that she heard me?

                          [Illustration: No. 6

                           BEETHOVEN'S MOTHER]

Vienna had given him a wonderful happiness. He met Mozart and had some
lessons from him in composition. When he played for the great master,
Mozart tip-toed from the room and said softly to those present:

"Pay heed to this boy. He will surely make a noise in the world some
day."

                          [Illustration: No. 7

                          BEETHOVEN AND MOZART]

After his Mother's death he determined that he would remain there. And
it was not until he talked with Joseph Haydn, who stopped at Bonn on his
way to London, that he decided once more to journey to Vienna. Beethoven
was twenty-two years old at the time he met Papa Haydn. Beethoven showed
the master some of his compositions. Haydn urged him to go at once to
Vienna, promising to give him lessons in composition on his return from
London.

                          [Illustration: No. 8

                             JOSEPH HAYDN]

Everywhere in Vienna Beethoven was a welcome guest. He was proud (but in
the right way), very honest, always straightforward and independent.
But, like his mother, he was warm-hearted and as true as could be. There
was nothing in his nature that was mean, or cruel, or wrong in any way.
He took pride in his talent and worked hard to perfect himself in it.

Here is what Beethoven's handwriting looked like.

                          [Illustration: No. 9

                        BEETHOVEN'S HANDWRITING]

Bit by bit, the great power of Beethoven as a pianist became known. He
played much among his friends, but he did not like to perform in public.

A story is told that once he was to play his C major Concerto at a
concert. When he arrived at the hall he found the piano was tuned so low
that he had to play the Concerto in C# major.

You know how hard it is to transpose a simple piece, but think of
transposing a Concerto and playing it with orchestra without time for
practice!

Do you sometimes wonder what the great composer looked like? Beethoven
lived outside of Vienna and often took long walks in the country. Once a
little boy ten years of age was taken by his father to visit Beethoven.
The boy must have been a very observant boy for he wrote out a
description of how Beethoven looked. This is the little boy's picture as
a man:

                             [Illustration: No. 10

                                  CARL CZERNY]

And this is the description he gave of Beethoven.

"Beethoven was dressed in a dark gray jacket and trousers of some
long-haired material, which reminded me of the description of Robinson
Crusoe I had just been reading. The jet-black hair stood upright on his
head. A beard, unshaven for several days, made still darker his
naturally swarthy face. I noticed also, with a child's quick perception,
that he had cotton wool which seemed to have been dipped in some yellow
fluid in both ears. His hands were covered with hair, and the fingers
were very broad, especially at the tips."

You know, of course, that when we think of music we think of _hearing_
it. We think how it _sounds_ to us. A lover of music loves to hear its
_tones_ and to feel its _rhythm_.

Like every other human being, Beethoven loved music in just this way. He
loved its sounds as they fell on the ear. As colors delight our eyes, so
tones fell with delight upon the ears of this man.

Beethoven was once invited to play at the home of a nobleman, but upon
being informed that he would be expected to go as a menial, he
indignantly rejected the proposal.

                         [Illustration: No. 11

                          THE ANGRY BEETHOVEN]

Beethoven had many friends and was fond of them. They knew that he was a
genius and were glad to forget some of the very strange things that he
did when he got angry. Here is a picture of the great master seated
among a group of his friends. Although Beethoven was odd, his friends
loved him.

                         [Illustration: No. 12

                   BEETHOVEN PLAYING FOR HIS FRIENDS]

But a strange Fate touched him and took away his sense of hearing. From
the time he was about thirty years old his hearing grew gradually worse.
Indeed it was necessary for him to have a piano especially constructed
with additional wires so that he could hear.

                         [Illustration: No. 13

                           BEETHOVEN'S PIANO]

Can you think of anything more cruel, more terrible, more depressing,
more awful?

                         [Illustration: No. 14

                       BEETHOVEN IN THE COUNTRY]

And yet he went on day, after day, composing beautiful music as he
walked the fields, or as he sat at his table. For we must remember that
he could hear his own music in his thoughts. That is, the mind that made
the music could hear it, though the ear itself was forever closed to the
sound of it.

Year after year he continued to write symphonies and concertos, sonatas,
songs, choral and chamber music.

And year after year the poor ears closed a little more and still a
little more, until finally not even the loudest noises could penetrate
them.

And yet he worked bravely; writing every beautiful music thought that
came to him, so that the world, and that means you and all of us, might
have them. When Beethoven was dying in 1827, Schubert called upon him
and remained with him for some time.

                         [Illustration: No. 15

                        BEETHOVEN AND SCHUBERT]




                       SOME FACTS ABOUT BEETHOVEN

Read these facts about Ludwig van Beethoven and try to write his story
out of them, using your own words.

When your story is finished ask your mother or your teacher to read it.
When you have made it as perfect as you can, copy it on pages 15 and 16.

1. The composer's full name was Ludwig van Beethoven.

2. He was born at Bonn on the River Rhine. (Look for Bonn on the map.)

3. His birthday is December 16, and his birth year was 1770.

4. The Beethoven House is now a Museum.

5. Beethoven's father was a singer.

6. Ludwig began to study music at the age of four.

7. He was shy and quiet in school, always thinking even then of music.

8. Even as a little boy he composed music.

9. When he was ten years old his first published composition appeared.

10. A teacher who helped him very much was Christian Gottlob Neefe.

11. Beethoven learned to play several instruments.

12. He went to Vienna when he was sixteen, met Mozart and had lessons
from him.

13. Later, Beethoven met Haydn at Bonn.

14. On Haydn's advice he returned to Vienna, making it his home for the
rest of his life.

15. Carl Czerny once called on Beethoven and wrote a fine description of
him.

16. At about thirty Beethoven became deaf.

17. Most of the great symphonies were composed after he lost his
hearing.

18. Beethoven died March 26, 1827, at the age of 57.




                             SOME QUESTIONS

1. When and where was Beethoven born?

2. Who was his first teacher?

3. What did his father do?

4. How long did little Ludwig go to school?

5. What description of him as a boy in school has been given?

6. How old was he when he first played in public?

7. What composition of his was first to be published?

8. Which of his teachers took great interest in him?

9. What did he say about the little boy's future?

10. Where did Beethoven go when he was sixteen years old?

11. With what two great masters did he study?

12. What composer, as a little boy, went to see Beethoven?

13. How did he describe him?

14. Name some of the forms of music which Beethoven composed.

15. Write a list of music by Beethoven that you have heard.

16. What is a concerto? a sonata?

17. How old was Beethoven when he died?




                   THE STORY OF LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN

Written by.......................................

On date..........................................

                         [Illustration: No. 16]




                           Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscores_.

Passages in small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

In the list of composers in the instructions on how to use the book, the
"r with a caron" in the name Dvor√°k was replaced with a regular "r".

On page 13, "ten year old" was replaced with "ten years old".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Beethoven, by Thomas Tapper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEETHOVEN ***

***** This file should be named 34737-8.txt or 34737-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/7/3/34737/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
