The Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Own Book of Great Musicians:
Schubert, by Thomas Tapper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Child's Own Book of Great Musicians: Schubert

Author: Thomas Tapper

Release Date: January 25, 2011 [EBook #35070]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S OWN BOOK: SCHUBERT ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                            CHILD'S OWN BOOK
                          _of Great Musicians_
                                SCHUBERT


                             [Illustration]


                                  _By_
                             THOMAS TAPPER


                          THEODORE PRESSER CO.
                          1712 CHESTNUT STREET
                              PHILADELPHIA




                          HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


This book is one of a series known as the CHILD'S OWN BOOK OF GREAT
MUSICIANS, written by Thomas Tapper, author of "Pictures from the Lives
of the Great Composers for Children," "Music Talks with Children,"
"First Studies in Music Biography," and others.

The sheet of illustrations included herewith is to be cut apart by the
child, and each illustration is to be inserted in its proper place
throughout the book, pasted in the space containing the same number as
will be found under each picture on the sheet. It is not necessary to
cover the entire back of a picture with paste. Put it only on the
corners and place neatly within the lines you will find printed around
each space. Use photographic paste, if possible.

After this play-work is completed there will be found at the back of the
book blank pages upon which the child is to write his own story of the
great musician, based upon the facts and questions found on the previous
pages.

The book is then to be sewed by the child through the center with the
cord found in the enclosed envelope. The book thus becomes the child's
own book.

This series will be found not only to furnish a pleasing and interesting
task for the children, but will teach them the main facts with regard to
the life of each of the great musicians--an educational feature worth
while.

                   *       *       *       *       *

This series of the Child's Own Book of Great Musicians includes at
present a book on each of the following:

    Bach                    Grieg                   Mozart
    Beethoven               Handel                  Nevin
    Brahms                  Haydn                   Schubert
    Chopin                  Liszt                   Schumann
    Dvor√°k                  MacDowell               Tschaikowsky
    Foster                  Mendelssohn             Verdi
                                                    Wagner

                          Printed in U. S. A.




                         [Illustration: No. 1]

                         [Illustration: No. 19]

                         [Illustration: No. 16]

                         [Illustration: No. 14]

                         [Illustration: No. 18]

                         [Illustration: No. 4]

                         [Illustration: No. 20]




                         [Illustration: No. 5]

                         [Illustration: No. 7]

                         [Illustration: No. 6]

                         [Illustration: No. 8]

                         [Illustration: No. 15]

                         [Illustration: No. 21]

                         [Illustration: No. 12]

                         [Illustration: No. 2]

                         [Illustration: No. 3]

                         [Illustration: No. 9]

                         [Illustration: No. 10]

                         [Illustration: No. 13]

                         [Illustration: No. 17]

                         [Illustration: No. 11]




                             Franz Schubert

             The Story of the Boy Who Wrote Beautiful Songs


                         This Book was made by

                        _____________________


                              Philadelphia
                          Theodore Presser Co.
                           1712 Chestnut Str.


                  Copyright, 1916, by THEO. PRESSER CO.
                         Printed in the U.S.A.




                      [Illustration: No. 1
                      Cut the picture of Schubert
                        from the sheet of pictures.
                      Paste in here.
                      Write the composer's name
                        below and the dates also.]


                                  BORN


                   ..................................

                                  DIED


                   ..................................




            The Story of the Boy Who Wrote Beautiful Songs.


One might say of Schubert that he was born with a spring of melody in
his heart and a song on his lips.

Can anyone make a melody more lovely than this?

                     [Illustration: No. 2
                     FROM SCHUBERT'S SONG "TROUT."]

Play it or have someone play it to you.

Is it not worth remembering all one's life?

Schubert composed many kinds of music, but his songs are most loved by
everybody.

They are sung all over the world.

And just because he never let a song come from his lips that did not
first come from his heart.

Is not this a jolly one?

                   [Illustration: No. 3
                   FROM SCHUBERT'S SONG "WANDERING."]

Schubert's full name was FRANZ PETER SCHUBERT.

He was born in Vienna, in a very simple house that looks quite
old-fashioned.

Over the doorway there is a bust of Schubert, a few inches high.

And a sign on the house says: Franz Schubert's Birthplace.

                     [Illustration: No. 4
                     FRANZ SCHUBERT'S BIRTHPLACE.]

Dates are easy to remember if we write them. So you must ask your
teacher when Schubert was born and put in the date in the next sentence.

Franz Schubert was born in.........

At that time the great American authors Washington Irving, James
Fenimore Cooper, and William Cullen Bryant were all boys.

                          [Illustration: No. 5
                          IRVING.]

                          [Illustration: No. 6
                          COOPER.]

                          [Illustration: No. 7
                          BRYANT.]

You may not know so much about them now, but some day they will be quite
as good friends as any you will ever make.

Even though these boys were a little older than Franz Schubert, let us
always think of them together.

Then, of course, we should think of Schubert together with the composers
who lived when he did.

Here are some whose names you can remember very easily.

                          [Illustration: No. 8
                          VON WEBER.]

                          [Illustration: No. 9
                          ROSSINI.]

                          [Illustration: No. 10
                          CZERNY.]

                          [Illustration: No. 11
                          DONIZETTI.]

Czerny was born in the year 1794, and wrote many studies for the piano.

How much older was he than Franz Schubert?

Von Weber wrote operas and conducted them himself. He was born eleven
years before Schubert.

Rossini was an Italian composer of operas, born in 1792, five years
before Schubert. Schubert's life was so short, however, that Rossini
lived forty years longer than the great song writer.

Donizetti was an Italian opera composer. One of his well-known operas
was Lucia di Lammermoor. He was born in 1797, just as Schubert was.

Franz's father was a schoolmaster, and so was Franz himself for three
years.

He taught the little children of Vienna their A-B-C's, and how to do
sums. Of course, he helped them to learn to read.

Sometimes we find it quite hard to take one piano lesson or violin
lesson a week.

But from the time when Franz Schubert was a very little boy he had
lessons every week for violin, voice, and piano.

A little later he began to study harmony with a very famous man who knew
Mozart. His name was ANTONIO SALIERI.

                          [Illustration: No. 12
                          ANTONIO SALIERI.]

With so many lessons and with school work just as we have it, Franz must
have been a very busy boy.

He was quite poor and often very hungry; but in spite of that he was
always good natured and full of fun.

At eleven years of age he became a singer in the chapel of the Emperor.
It was here that Salieri was director.

Franz sang in the choir until he was nearly seventeen. Then he became a
schoolmaster, because, of course, he had to earn his living.

Wherever he was Franz was thinking music and composing it. Once he wrote
a song called _The Serenade_ at a table outside an inn.

An artist has made a picture of this.

                   [Illustration: No. 13
                   SCHUBERT WRITING "THE SERENADE."]

Once Schubert was seen by his boyhood friends busily writing a new song.
So quick did he write that the ink was hardly dry on one sheet before
the next one was done. He was writing the music to a beautiful fairy
poem by the great German poet Goethe. The poem is called _The Erl-King_,
and tells how the fairy Erl-King chases a father who is rushing on
horseback with his dying child in his arms. Finally, just as the father
reaches his courtyard the child dies. It is a beautiful song sung by the
greatest singers.

Goethe, the great poet, is not known to have met Schubert. He paid
little attention to his music.

Here is his picture.

                        [Illustration: No. 14
                        JOHANN WOLFGANG GOETHE.]

Sometime you will learn about Joseph Haydn, who died in Vienna when
little Franz was twelve years old. Papa Haydn, as he was called, was
music master in a famous family called the Esterhazys.

Let us put a picture of Joseph Haydn here just to remember that he was
an old man of seventy-seven when little Franz was a boy of twelve.

                         [Illustration: No. 15
                         JOSEPH HAYDN.]

Well, Franz Schubert also lived for a time with the Esterhazy family. He
was piano teacher to the children of Count Johann. Franz was then
twenty-one years old.

In what year was he twenty-one?

A good friend of Schubert's was Michael Vogl. He was a famous singer,
who did all he could to make Schubert's songs known.

They took little vacation trips together and were good companions. When
you read more about this singer's friendship for Franz Schubert you will
like him for being so kind to one who had very little pleasure in life.

He looks like a good friend even in a picture--do you not think so?

                         [Illustration: No. 16
                SCHUBERT ACCOMPANYING VOGL AS HE SINGS.]

Once when Schubert and Vogl were enjoying a vacation tour in the
mountains, Franz read Scott's _Lady of the Lake_, which was printed in
the year 1810, when Schubert was thirteen years old.

Schubert set some of this poem to music. A fact you will remember when
you read it in school.

Perhaps you could remember at the same time that Scott was a little
older than Schubert and just one year younger than Beethoven.

Beethoven lived in Vienna at that time and Schubert with two friends
went to see him. Beethoven was very deaf, and those who met him had to
write down what they wanted to say with a large pencil, such as is used
by carpenters. Schubert was so modest and nervous upon meeting the great
master that he could not even write his replies.

Here is the picture of the way Beethoven looked as he walked down the
street in those days:

                         [Illustration: No. 17
                         BEETHOVEN IN VIENNA.]

Once when Schubert was very ill a friend sent him some books to read.
They were _The Last of the Mohicans_, _The Spy_, _The Pilot_, and _The
Pioneer_.

Now these books were written by the American author, whose name you must
find for yourself.

                         [Illustration: No. 18
                         SCHUBERT'S WORK ROOM.]

See what a simple work room Schubert had. Here are his Clavier and chair
and a few books.

Schubert had music in his mind and soul all the time. It is said that
one of his favorite walks was down by a mill, where he was inspired to
write some beautiful songs.

                         [Illustration: No. 19
                  SCHUBERT BY THE MILL IN THE WOODS.]

This is the way that Franz Schubert wrote his name.

                         [Illustration: No. 20]


                   *       *       *       *       *


                   FACTS ABOUT FRANZ PETER SCHUBERT.


When you have read this page and the next make a story about Schubert's
life. Write it in your own words. When you are quite sure you cannot
improve it, copy it on pages 14, 15, and 16.

1. Schubert was born in Vienna.

2. His birthday was January 31, 1797.

3. He died in Vienna in 1828.

4. When Schubert was born Beethoven was twenty-seven years old.

5. Schubert was a schoolmaster.

6. He had his first music lessons from his father, who was also a
schoolmaster and who played the violin.

7. His brother taught him to play the piano, and he studied singing so
as to join the Emperor's Choir.

8. Then he studied harmony with a famous man named Salieri.

9. When Franz was thirteen he composed two piano pieces, at fourteen he
wrote two songs, and when he was sixteen he wrote a symphony.

10. When he was eighteen Franz wrote more than a hundred songs.

11. He composed _The Erl-King_ when he was nineteen.

12. In all, Schubert wrote over six hundred songs, lots of piano pieces,
nine symphonies, and many other compositions.

13. What other composer also wrote nine symphonies? Perhaps you may not
know this; if not, ask your teacher.

14. Schubert made many good friends.

15. With them and his music he found all his happiness.

16. Once when he was very ill he read some books by an American author.
Do you remember the author's name?

17. Do you remember the name of any one of the books?

18. One of Schubert's most beautiful symphonies was called _The
Unfinished_, because he did not live to complete it.


                      TEN QUESTIONS ABOUT SCHUBERT.

1. Where was Schubert born?

2. When was Schubert born?

3. Name two American authors who were boys when Schubert was born.

4. Name two composers who lived at the same time.

5. What was the father of Franz Schubert?

6. Who taught Schubert harmony?

7. Give the name of a famous song by Schubert.

8. What famous musician died in Vienna when Schubert was twelve years
old?

9. Who was the noted singer who helped to make Schubert's songs famous?

10. When did Schubert die?




                   THE STORY OF FRANZ PETER SCHUBERT

    Written by....................................

    On (date).....................................

                         [Illustration: No. 21]




Transcriber's Notes:

In the list of composers in the instructions on how to use the book, the
"r with a caron" in the name Dvor√°k was replaced with a regular "r".

On page 7, "WOLFANG" was replaced with "WOLFGANG"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Own Book of Great Musicians:
Schubert, by Thomas Tapper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S OWN BOOK: SCHUBERT ***

***** This file should be named 35070-8.txt or 35070-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/0/7/35070/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
