The Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Own Book of Great Musicians: Verdi, by 
Thomas Tapper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Child's Own Book of Great Musicians: Verdi

Author: Thomas Tapper

Release Date: February 4, 2011 [EBook #35158]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S OWN BOOK: VERDI ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal, the
Distributed Proofreading Music Team, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                          CHILD'S OWN BOOK OF
                            GREAT MUSICIANS
                                 VERDI


                             [Illustration]


                                   BY
                             THOMAS TAPPER


                              Philadelphia
                          Theodore Presser Co.
                          1712 Chestnut Street




                             [Illustration]

                         Directions for Binding


Enclosed in this envelope is the cord and the needle with which to bind
this book. Start in from the outside as shown on the diagram here. Pass
the needle and thread through the center of the book, leaving an end
extend outside, then through to the outside, about 2 inches from the
center; then from the outside to inside 2 inches from the center at the
other end of the book, bringing the thread finally again through the
center, and tie the two ends in a knot, one each side of the cord on the
outside.


                 THEO. PRESSER CO., Pub's., Phila., Pa.




                          HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


This book is one of a series known as THE CHILD'S OWN BOOK OF THE GREAT
MUSICIANS, written by Thomas Tapper, author of "Pictures from the Lives
of the Great Composers for Children," "Music Talks with Children,"
"First Studies in Music Biography," and others.

The sheet of illustrations included herewith is to be cut apart by the
child, and each illustration is to be inserted in its proper place
throughout the book, pasted in the space containing the same number as
will be found under each picture on the sheet. It is not necessary to
cover the entire back of a picture with paste. Put it only on the
corners and place neatly within the lines you will find printed around
each space. Use photographic paste, if possible.

After this play-work is completed there will be found at the back of the
book blank pages upon which the child is to write his own story of the
great musician, based upon the facts and questions found on the previous
pages.

The book is then to be sewed by the child through the center with the
cord found in the enclosed envelope. The book thus becomes the child's
own book.

This series will be found not only to furnish a pleasing and interesting
task for the children, but will teach them the main facts with regard to
the life of each of the great musicians--an educational feature worth
while.

                   *       *       *       *       *

This series of The Child's Own Book of the Great Musicians includes at
present a book on each of the following:

            Bach                                 Mendelssohn
            Beethoven                            Mozart
            Chopin                               Schubert
            Grieg                                Schumann
            Handel                               Verdi
            Haydn                                Wagner
            Liszt

                         Printed in the U.S.A.




                         [Illustration: No. 1]

                         [Illustration: No. 7]

                         [Illustration: No. 10]

                         [Illustration: No. 6]

                         [Illustration: No. 11]

                         [Illustration: No. 3]

                         [Illustration: No. 2]

                         [Illustration: No. 13]

                         [Illustration: No. 8]

                         [Illustration: No. 9]

                         [Illustration: No. 15]

                         [Illustration: No. 12]

                         [Illustration: No. 4]

                         [Illustration: No. 14]

                         [Illustration: No. 5]




                                 VERDI


                      The Story of the Little Boy
                        Who Loved the Hand Organ


                         This Book was made by

                         _____________________


                              Philadelphia
                          Theodore Presser Co.
                           1712 Chestnut Str.


     Copyright 1919, by THEO. PRESSER CO.--British Copyright Secured
                           Printed in U. S. A.




                      [Illustration: No. 1
                      Cut the picture of Verdi
                      from the sheet of pictures.
                      Paste in here.
                      Write the composer's name
                      below and the dates also.]


                                  BORN


                   ..................................

                                  DIED


                   ..................................




                             Giuseppe Verdi


The picture on this page is of the house wherein a great composer was
born. Of course, one is not born a great composer. He has to become
that. So, at the moment this story begins there is, within this house, a
little boy quite like any other boy. He loved to play and to make a
noise and to have a good time. But most of all--what do you think he
loved?

A hand organ.

                          [Illustration: No. 2
                          VERDI'S BIRTHPLACE]

Whenever the organ man came into the village of Roncole, in Italy (where
Verdi was born, October 10, 1813), he could not be kept indoors. But he
followed the wonderful organ and the wonderful man who played it, all
day long, as happy as he could be.

When Giuseppe was seven years old his father, though only a poor
innkeeper, bought him a spinet, a sort of small piano. So faithfully did
the little boy practise that the spinet was soon quite worn out and new
jacks, or hammers, had to be made for it. This was done by Stephen
Cavaletti, who wrote a message on one of the jacks telling that he made
them anew and covered them with leather, and fixed the pedal, doing all
for nothing, because the little boy, Giuseppe Verdi, showed such
willingness to practise and to learn. Thus the good Stephen thought this
was pay enough.

Here is a picture of the little piano. In Verdi's language (Italian) it
is called a spinetta.

                          [Illustration: No. 3
                          VERDI'S SPINET]

It was on this spinet that the little boy discovered one day a wonderful
chord, for so it seemed to him. It was this:

                         [Illustration: No. 4]

The tones delighted him and he pressed the keys over and over again to
drink them in. But the next day when he sought again the keys which made
the lovely sound, he could not find them. This made him so impatient
and finally so curious that he began to break the spinet to pieces with
a hammer. Fortunately the noise he made brought his father into the room
and the spinet was saved.

When Giuseppe was making his first attempt to find beautiful chords on
the spinet he was, as we have said, seven years old. That was in 1820.

When he was ten years old (what year was that?) Giuseppe became organist
at the old church of Roncole. Truly a little boy for so great a
position! One day he scratched his name on the woodwork. Here is a
picture of the organ:

                          [Illustration: No. 5
                          ORGAN AT RONCOLE]

Here is the scratching of his name:

                         [Illustration: No. 6]

And here is the way he wrote his name, as a man:

                         [Illustration: No. 7]

Then there came the question of education--of reading, writing, spelling
and arithmetic--for this music-loving boy. The Verdis wanted Giuseppe to
grow up as he should; so it was arranged for him to go to school in the
neighboring town of Busseto. A cobbler lived there who was a friend of
the family, and with him Giuseppe went to live, having board, lodging
and tuition at the school, and all for six cents a day.

Giuseppe still played the organ at Roncole, going thither afoot every
Sunday morning and back after nightfall.

He must have been a weary little boy after the day's music-making at the
church. One Sunday night when it was dark and he was too weary to notice
where he was going, he fell into a ditch, from which he was rescued by
an old woman, who, hearing his call for help, pulled the half-frozen boy
out of the water.

Our little hero had another talent besides music. He knew how to win the
friendship of people. So at Busseto a man named Barezzi offered to take
him into his business. He sold spices, drugs and perfumes. But besides
this he played the flute in the church. At his house Giuseppe heard lots
of good music, for the town orchestra rehearsed there. Here is a picture
of Giuseppe's friend:

                         [Illustration: No. 8
                         BAREZZI]

Then Giuseppe made another friend who gave him a wonderful bit of
advice. HE URGED HIM TO BECOME A COMPOSER!

Better still he helped the boy in every way he could until he was
sixteen years old. By that time our little Giuseppe was grown to be
quite a man. His friend, whose name was Ferdinando Provesi, was proud of
him, for already he was becoming a master. He played the cathedral organ
at times; he conducted the Philharmonic Orchestra; he led its
rehearsals, and he composed music for its concerts.

                         [Illustration: No. 9
                         PROVESI]

So you see--all the wonderful operas that were to come were already on
the way!

It has been written that Provesi was the first person to see and
understand Verdi's real genius. The boy worked hard and advanced so
rapidly that it was soon necessary for him to go to a larger city for
lessons.

Now a good friend is always a good friend, so it is pleasing to tell
that Barezzi sent Giuseppe to Milan, the lovely city of Lombardy, to
study. And here a curious thing happened. He was refused a scholarship
at the Conservatory of Milan; the reason given was that the authorities
considered him to show no special talent for music. But this made no
difference to the boy. He believed in his talent and kept at work to
perfect it.

                         [Illustration: No. 10
                         VERDI AS A YOUNG MAN]

So, as the years went by, he kept on learning more and more, doing his
work well and always preparing himself for better things. Then one day
he was ready to begin to compose the operas that made him famous.

Some time when you read the full list of Verdi's operas you will learn
that he wrote thirty. The first was performed in 1839, when he was
twenty-six years old, and the last in 1893, when he was eighty. You will
not need to remember the titles of them all, but you must know the
names of the great ones, for one day you will see and hear them
performed.

                         [Illustration: No. 11
                         VERDI IN OLD AGE]

Here are the principal ones:

    Ernani,             La Traviata,            Aida,
    Rigoletto,          Sicilian Vespers,       Othello,
    Il Trovatore,       Masked Ball,            Falstaff.

Do you know that of one of Verdi's operas the scene is laid in our
country? The MASKED BALL was first entitled Gustavo III. But the
authorities would not allow reference to certain political matters in
it. Therefore the libretto (or story) of the opera was changed, and the
scene laid in Boston, Massachusetts. One of the characters was the
Governor of Boston, a humorous matter to us, for there never was any
such official.

Another famous opera by Verdi, the scene of which is laid in a foreign
country, is Aida. It was written for the Khedive of Egypt, and first
performed in Cairo in 1871, when the composer was fifty-eight years
old.

                         [Illustration: No. 12
                         A SCENE FROM AÏDA]

After Verdi had composed Aida he wrote no more operas for sixteen years.
Then to the great surprise of all the world he wrote two others, the
finest of them all--Othello and Falstaff.

Meanwhile he was a farmer. He planted, harvested, helped his tenants,
urged them to cultivate the land carefully. He bought all kinds of
American farming machinery to show the Italians how to cultivate the
ground to best advantage.

The great man, who was once a simple little boy, died in 1901, on
January 27, which day is the anniversary of Mozart's birth.

All his life long Verdi had succeeded, doing a little more and a little
better each year, so that, at the end of his life, he was able to do a
truly wonderful thing: namely, to build a home where musicians--who had
not succeeded in life--could find a comfortable abiding place in their
old age.

                         [Illustration: No. 13
                         VERDI HOME FOR AGED MUSICIANS]

                         [Illustration: No. 14
                         VERDI'S TOMB]

In this House are many souvenirs of the great Italian. Here, too, is the
tomb of Giuseppe Verdi.

Verdi was loved by his fellow-countrymen. His music is their joy--and
ours--and will so remain for years to come; perhaps forever.

The great sculptor, Vincenzo Gemito, has molded wonderful bronze busts
of Verdi, which shows us how the little boy of Roncole grew to be a man
of world renown.

                       *       *       *       *       *

                        SOME FACTS ABOUT GIUSEPPE VERDI

Read these facts about Giuseppe Verdi, and try to write his story out of
them, using your own words.

When your story is finished, ask your mother or your teacher to read it.
When you have made it as perfect as you can, copy it on pages 14, 15 and
16.

1. Giuseppe Verdi was born in Roncole, Italy, October 10, 1813.

2. He began to learn the Spinet when he was seven years old.

3. The Spinet is an early form of the piano.

4. Among the great composers who were alive when Verdi was a little boy
were: Beethoven, Schubert, Berlioz and Schumann.

5. He became organist at Roncole when he was ten years old (1823).

6. He went to school in Busseto and lived with a cobbler.

7. After a time he studied in Milan.

8. But not at the famous Milan Conservatory, for he was told there that
he had no special talent for music.

9. Verdi wrote thirty operas.

10. The first was performed in 1839, when he was twenty-six years old.

11. One of his operas has its scene laid in Boston, Mass.

12. Another is about Egypt, and the scene is laid in Memphis and Thebes,
in the time of the Pharaohs.

13. Verdi founded, for aged musicians, the Casa di Riposo (House of
Rest).

14. Besides the thirty operas Verdi wrote a string quartet, The Manzoni
Requiem, and a National Hymn.

15. For a period of sixteen years Verdi wrote no operas. Then he
produced his two great works, Othello and Falstaff.

16. He died at St. Agatha, January 27, 1901.


                               SOME QUESTIONS

1. When and where was Verdi born?

2. How old was he when he died?

3. Can you mention three works of Verdi that are not operas?

4. How many operas can you name from memory?

5. What instruments did Verdi play as a boy?

6. What was the title of Verdi's first opera?

7. The title of his last two operas?

8. What did Verdi love to do besides compose music?

9. What is a Spinet?

10. In what famous city did he study as a boy?

11. How many operas, in all, did Verdi compose?

12. Where is the scene of Aida laid?

13. To what did Verdi devote his fortune?




                      THE STORY OF GIUSEPPE VERDI

Written by.............................

On (date).............................

                         [Illustration: No. 15]




                          Transcriber's Notes

This book has inconsistencies in the names, sometimes anglicizing names
and sometimes not anglicizing the very same name (e.g., Aida and Aïda).

On page 8, "The first was performed in 1893" was replaced with "The
first was performed in 1839".






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Own Book of Great Musicians:
Verdi, by Thomas Tapper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S OWN BOOK: VERDI ***

***** This file should be named 35158-8.txt or 35158-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/1/5/35158/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal, the
Distributed Proofreading Music Team, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
