The Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Own Book of Great Musicians: Handel, by 
Thomas Tapper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Child's Own Book of Great Musicians: Handel

Author: Thomas Tapper

Release Date: February 4, 2011 [EBook #35157]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S OWN BOOK: HANDEL ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal, the
Distributed Proofreading Music Team, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                            CHILD'S OWN BOOK
                          _of Great Musicians_
                                 HANDEL

                             [Illustration]

                                  _By_
                             THOMAS TAPPER

                          THEODORE PRESSER CO.
                          1712 CHESTNUT STREET
                              PHILADELPHIA




                             [Illustration]

                         Directions for Binding


Enclosed in this envelope is the cord and the needle with which to bind
this book. Start in from the outside as shown on the diagram here. Pass
the needle and thread through the center of the book, leaving an end
extend outside, then through to the outside, about 2 inches from the
center; then from the outside to inside 2 inches from the center at the
other end of the book, bringing the thread finally again through the
center, and tie the two ends in a knot, one each side of the cord on the
outside.


                 THEO. PRESSER CO., Pub's., Phila., Pa.




                          HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


This book is one of a series known as the CHILD'S OWN BOOK OF GREAT
MUSICIANS, written by Thomas Tapper, author of "Pictures from the Lives
of the Great Composers for Children," "Music Talks with Children,"
"First Studies in Music Biography," and others.

The sheet of illustrations included herewith is to be cut apart by the
child, and each illustration is to be inserted in its proper place
throughout the book, pasted in the space containing the same number as
will be found under each picture on the sheet. It is not necessary to
cover the entire back of a picture with paste. Put it only on the
corners and place neatly within the lines you will find printed around
each space. Use photographic paste, if possible.

After this play-work is completed there will be found at the back of the
book blank pages upon which the child is to write his own story of the
great musician, based upon the facts and questions found on the previous
pages.

The book is then to be sewed by the child through the center with the
cord found in the enclosed envelope. The book thus becomes the child's
own book.

This series will be found not only to furnish a pleasing and interesting
task for the children, but will teach them the main facts with regard to
the life of each of the great musicians--an educational feature worth
while.

                   *       *       *       *       *

This series of the Child's Own Book of Great Musicians includes at
present a book on each of the following:

    Bach                    Grieg                   Mozart
    Beethoven               Handel                  Nevin
    Brahms                  Haydn                   Schubert
    Chopin                  Liszt                   Schumann
    Dvorák                  MacDowell               Tschaikowsky
    Foster                  Mendelssohn             Verdi
                                                    Wagner




                         [Illustration: No. 1]

                         [Illustration: No. 5]

                         [Illustration: No. 12]

                         [Illustration: No. 3]

                         [Illustration: No. 13]

                         [Illustration: No. 15]

                         [Illustration: No. 7]

                         [Illustration: No. 8]

                         [Illustration: No. 9]

                         [Illustration: No. 2]

                         [Illustration: No. 11]

                         [Illustration: No. 10]

                         [Illustration: No. 14]

                         [Illustration: No. 4]

                         [Illustration: No. 6]




                                 Handel

                       The Story of a Little Boy
                       Who Practiced in an Attic

                         This Book was made by

                         _____________________


                              Philadelphia
                          Theodore Presser Co.
                           1712 Chestnut Str.

                  Copyright, 1916, by THEO. PRESSER CO.
                           Printed in U.S.A.




                     [Illustration: No. 1
                     Cut the picture of Handel from
                     the sheet of pictures. Paste in here.
                     Write the composer's name
                     below and the dates also.]


                   ..................................

                                  BORN


                   ..................................

                                  DIED


                   ..................................




          The Story of a Little Boy Who Practiced in an Attic


When we read about the great composers we learn that they come from all
kinds of families.

Bach's parents were poor. Mendelssohn's were rich. Schubert's father was
a schoolmaster. Mozart's father was a violinist.

The story which you are to read in this book and then write out in your
own words is about a boy whose parents were neither well-to-do nor well
known.

His name is George Frederick Handel. In Germany where Handel was born
his name was Georg Friedrich Händel (pronounced Gay-org Freed-riesh
Hayn-del). But the great composer spent so much of his life in England
that people now use the English form of his name.

                          [Illustration: No. 2
                          HANDEL'S BIRTHPLACE.]

Look at this queer old house where the great master was born.

Handel was born in the same year as Johann Sebastian Bach, 1685.

The father was a surgeon and barber, a queer combination. We know that
he did not like music, and that he was unwilling for his son to study
it. Of the mother we know little. But we do know that she loved her
little George Frederick, and helped him as far as she could.

The father was so determined that his son should not study music that he
refused to let him go to school. He feared, no doubt, that the boy would
soon learn to read notes.

But with the mother it was quite different. She observed the little
boy's love of music.

In the Handel home there was a big roomy attic; the ceiling was low, and
the windows had thick panes; the walls and floors were built of heavy
timber, and silence reigned there.

                          [Illustration: No. 3
               THE CHILD HANDEL PRACTICING IN THE ATTIC.]

"Here," said Mother Handel, "my little boy can play the harpsichord to
his heart's content and no one will be the wiser." You can imagine the
surprise when the stern barber-surgeon stalked into the attic, followed
by the family, holding high the lantern.

After that it may have been agreed that the boy should practice a
little; not, however, that he might become a musician. "No, indeed," we
may imagine Father Handel exclaiming, "my son shall be a famous lawyer."

One day when little George was seven years old his father set out by
coach to visit another son, who was in the service of the Duke of
Saxe-Weissenfels. The little boy begged his father to let him go on the
journey. "No," he replied, "you are too young to go so far."

However, when the coach set out George Frederick set out too on foot to
follow, and he would not be sent home again.

                          [Illustration: No. 4
                 HANDEL FOLLOWING HIS FATHER'S COACH.]

He kept on trudging along as fast as his little feet would go. Every one
hoped he would get tired and go back, but finally the father had to
order the coach to stop and take him in. Thus did he show that
determination which helped him all his life.

Arrived at the castle the boy soon made friends with the chapel
musicians. They took him to the organ loft, where he played for them.

All were delighted with his talent. One day the Duke himself heard him
play. He, too, was astonished that one so young should show so much
skill. Calling the father into his presence, he pointed out how wrong it
was to deny the boy the right to study music. "The world," he said,
"should have the good of your son's great ability."

At the Cathedral in Handel's home city, Halle, there was a famous
organist named Zachau. He became the boy's teacher. They must have had a
busy time together, for he had lessons from Zachau not only in organ
playing, but in harmony, counterpoint, canon, and fugue; and in
hautbois, violin, and harpsichord playing.

If you will look at this picture of the harpsichord on which Handel
played, you will see that it is unlike the grand piano of our day. How
does it differ? And yet for this simple instrument Handel wrote
beautiful music. Some day you will play his Little Fugues and some of
the dances from the Suites.

                          [Illustration: No. 5
                          HANDEL HARPSICHORD.]

Handel studied with Zachau for three years. The teacher said one day,
"The boy knows more than I do." So he was sent to Berlin, when he was
eleven years old, to find other teachers.

Here he met two famous men, Buononcini and Ariosti. The former was harsh
and unkind to him, but Ariosti treated him kindly and encouraged him.
They all met again in later years in London.

When Handel was twelve years old his father died. From that time on he
worked hard to perfect himself in his profession. He became organist at
Halle, but soon left there for Hamburg, which at that time was renowned
for its music.

Here Handel began to work his way, making many friends, one of whom was
the famous Johann Mattheson. One day Handel and Mattheson went by coach
to Lubeck, where, at one of the churches, an organist was wanted.
Mattheson wished to try for the position, but when he learned he would
have to marry the daughter of the old organist he and Handel came back
to Hamburg heart free. This is a fine old picture of Handel's friend,
Johann Mattheson.

                          [Illustration: No. 6
                              MATTHESON.]

Though Handel went to Hamburg an unknown boy, he soon became famous.
Here he wrote sacred music and his first operas.

In his twenty-second year Handel went to Italy, where he stayed for
three years. Here he met and became very friendly with Corelli and the
two Scarlattis.

                          [Illustration: No. 7
                              A. CORELLI.]

                          [Illustration: No. 8
                             A. SCARLATTI.]

                          [Illustration: No. 9
                             D. SCARLATTI.]

After his residence in Italy Handel went back to Germany, where he met
the Elector of Hanover, who induced him to accept the post of
Capellmeister. Handel agreed to do this on condition that he might first
visit England.

When Handel reached England he found himself already well known there.
The English people knew his operas, and liked them so much that Handel
concluded to stay.

But to his surprise and confusion it happened while he was in London
that the very Elector of Hanover became George I, King of England.
Handel expected he would fare badly with the king for not having
returned as Capellmeister to Germany. But a friend arranged the matter
so that Handel should compose some music for the king's coronation,
hoping thereby to please his majesty.

He composed twenty-five pieces, called _Water Music_. A boat containing
the players followed that in which the king sat. When the music was
performed the king asked who composed it. This led to Handel's being
invited into the royal boat, where he again won the king's favor.

                         [Illustration: No. 10
                             WATER MUSIC.]

Handel greatly wished to give opera in London and devote his time to it
as composer. For many years the writing and staging of operas took all
of Handel's time and thought, but he was not destined to make it a true
success. Handel was a very fine performer at the keyboard.

                         [Illustration: No. 11
                        HANDEL AT THE KEYBOARD.]

Once again Handel visited his native land. On returning to England,
which was to be his home for the future, he was asked by a wealthy
gentleman, the Duke of Chandos, to become composer at the ducal
residence. Handel accepted this offer and composed much beautiful music,
which some day we shall hear.

Handel was much beloved in England and was received at court.

                         [Illustration: No. 12
           HANDEL IN THE DRESS HE WORE AT THE ENGLISH COURT.]

He had tried hard to please the English public as an opera composer, and
the disappointment of his failure caused him a severe illness from
which he suffered greatly. He lived to write some of the most lovely
music the world possesses.

Perhaps the most famous of all his oratorios is the _Messiah_. When this
was sung for the first time in London the king and all present rose at
the words--_For the Lord God Omnipotent Reigneth_. Thus came the custom
of rising at the singing of the _Hallelujah Chorus_.

Handel loved England and became a naturalized British subject. He had a
house in London, which in those days must have been considered a very
fine one. He was very fond of gathering bodies of musicians together.
Here he is in a familiar group.

                         [Illustration: No. 13
                HANDEL IN THE CIRCLE OF HIS MUSICIANS.]

A great lover of children, Handel once conducted the _Messiah_ for the
benefit of a hospital for little children, to which he gave large sums.

Toward the end of his life he became blind. Some one had to lead him to
the organ loft, where, with his wonderful skill, he could still charm
and delight.

The last appearance that Handel made in public was to conduct the
_Messiah_. A few days later, on Good Friday, April 13, 1759, he passed
away.

                          [Illustration: No. 14
                 BLIND HANDEL BEING LED TO THE ORGAN.]

The English people loved and admired him so much that he was buried in
Westminster Abbey.


                           FACTS ABOUT HANDEL

Read these facts about Handel, and from them make up the story of his
life. Use your own words. After your teacher has read it, copy the story
on pages 15 and 16 of this book.

1. He was born in Halle in Germany, February 23, 1685.

2. His full name was George Frederick Handel.

3. His father was a barber and surgeon, who intended his son to become a
lawyer.

4. As a little boy he practiced the harpsichord in the garret.

5. Once he went with his father to the home of the Duke of
Saxe-Weissenfels.

6. Here he played the organ and won the Duke's attention.

7. The Duke advised the father to let the boy study music.

8. His first teacher was Zachau, who taught him many things, including
organ and harpsichord playing.

9. After a few years with Zachau he went to Berlin, and there met two
famous men.

10. Then he returned to Halle, but after his father's death he went to
Hamburg.

11. At Hamburg he and Johann Mattheson became good friends.

12. He lived in Italy for three years.

13. Returning to Germany he agreed to become Capellmeister to the
Elector of Hanover.

14. But he failed to keep his promise to the Elector by overstaying his
leave of absence in London.

15. The Elector became King of England. He was very angry at Handel for
disobeying him.

16. Handel won his friendship again by writing the _Water Music_ for a
royal boat procession on the river Thames.

17. For many years Handel composed operas, but finally he won fame by
writing oratorios.

18. He wrote the _Messiah_ and many others well known to-day.

19. He became blind toward the end of his life.

20. He died on Good Friday, 1759.


                      SOME QUESTIONS ABOUT HANDEL

1. In what year was Handel born?

2. What other great composer was born the same year in Germany?

3. What was the profession of Handel's father?

4. How did it come about that Handel was allowed to study music?

5. Who was Handel's first teacher?

6. What subjects did he study with his teacher?

7. What instruments did Handel play?

8. In what other cities and countries did Handel live?

9. Of what country did he become a citizen?

10. Name some of the famous composers of the day whom Handel knew.

11. What kinds of music did Handel write?

12. What form of music is the _Messiah_?

13. What was the _Water Music_?

14. How did Handel come to write it?

15. When did Handel die and where was he buried?




                  THE STORY OF GEORGE FREDERICK HANDEL

Written by..............................................

On (date)...............................................


                         [Illustration: No. 15]




                          Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscores_.

In the list of composers in the instructions on how to use the book, the
"r with a hácek" in the name Dvorák was replaced with a regular "r".

On page 3, "Johann Christian Bach" was replaced with "Johann Sebastian
Bach".

On page 17, "Water Music" was italicized.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Own Book of Great Musicians:
Handel, by Thomas Tapper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S OWN BOOK: HANDEL ***

***** This file should be named 35157-8.txt or 35157-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/1/5/35157/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ernest Schaal, the
Distributed Proofreading Music Team, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
