Project Gutenberg's Key to the Science of Theology, by Parley P. Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Key to the Science of Theology

Author: Parley P. Pratt

Release Date: March 3, 2011 [EBook #35470]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEY TO THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project,
http://bencrowder.net/books/mtp. Volunteers: Benjamin
Bytheway, Hilton Campbell, Ben Crowder, Meridith Crowder,
Cameron Dixon, Tod Robbins, David Van Leeuwen.





Frontispiece.

  Fly--fly--these thoughts on the lightning car,
  With the speed of light to the realms afar!
  Mount--mount the car with the horse of fire;
  Outstrip the wind, he will never tire,
  Let the wild bird scream as he lags behind,
  And the hurricane a champion find.
  Search the darkest spot where mortals dwell:
  With a voice of thunder the tidings tell,
  Proclaim the dawn of a brighter day,
  When the _King of kings_ shall his sceptre sway.
  Bid pain, and anguish, and sorrow cease,
  And open the way for the _Prince of Peace_.
  He will conquer death, bid mourning flee,
  And give to the nations a _Jubilee_.




KEY
TO THE
SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY:

DESIGNED AS

An Introduction

TO THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF SPIRITUAL PHILOSOPHY; RELIGION; LAW AND
GOVERNMENT; AS DELIVERED BY THE ANCIENTS, AND AS RESTORED IN THIS AGE,
FOR THE FINAL DEVELOPMENT OF UNIVERSAL PEACE, TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE.


BY PARLEY P. PRATT.


    O Truth divine! what treasures unrevealed,
    In thine exhaustless fountains are concealed!
    Words multiplied; how powerless to tell,
    The infinitude with which our bosoms swell.


Liverpool:
F. D. RICHARDS, 15, WILTON STREET.

London:
L.D SAINTS' BOOK DEPOT, 35, JEWIN ST., CITY,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


1855.




ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HALL.


J. Sadler, Printer, 1, Moorfields, Liverpool.




CONTENTS.


Preface

CHAPTER I.

  Theology--its definition--historical illustrations

CHAPTER II.

  Decline and loss of this science among the Jews

CHAPTER III.

  Progress, decline and final loss of the science of Theology among
  the Gentiles--foreshadowings of its restoration for the ushering in
  of the Millennium

CHAPTER IV.

  Rise, progress, decline and loss of the science of Theology on the
  Western Hemisphere, as brought to light by the late discovery of
  Ancient American Records

CHAPTER V.

  Keys of the mysteries of the Godhead

CHAPTER VI.

  Origin of the Universe

CHAPTER VII.

  Destiny of the Universe

CHAPTER VIII.

  Key of Knowledge, Power and Government

CHAPTER IX.

  Revival, or restoration of the science of Theology, in the present
  age

CHAPTER X.

  Keys of initiation in practical Theology

CHAPTER XI.

  Philosophy of Miracles

CHAPTER XII.

  Angels and Spirits

CHAPTER XIII.

  Dreams

CHAPTER XIV.

  The world of Spirits

CHAPTER XV.

  Resurrection, its times and degrees--first, second and third
  heavens; or, the Telestial, Terrestrial and Celestial kingdoms

CHAPTER XVI.

  Further remarks on man's physical and intellectual
  progress--Philosophy of will, as originating, directing and
  controlling all voluntary animal motion--astounding facts, in
  relation to the speed, or velocity of motion, as attainable by
  physical man--intercommunication of the inhabitants of different and
  distant planets

CHAPTER XVII.

  Laws of marriage and procreation




PREFACE.


The present is an age of progress, of change, of rapid advance, and of
wonderful revolutions.

The very foundations of society--social, political, commercial, moral
and religious, seem to be shaken as with a mighty earthquake, from
centre to circumference. All things tremble; creation groans; the
world is in travail, and pains to be delivered.

A new era has dawned upon our planet, and is advancing with
accelerated force--with giant strides.

The rail-roads and the steam-boats, with their progressive
improvements in speed, safety and convenience, are extending and
multiplying the means of travel, of trade, of association, and
intercommunication between countries whose inhabitants have been
comparatively unknown to, or estranged from, each other.

But, as if even these means were too slow for the God-like
aspirations, the mighty throes of human thought, and its struggles for
light and expansion, man seizes the lightning, tames and subdues it,
and makes it the bearer of his thoughts and despatches. While these
things are in progress by one portion of mankind, another learns to
seize and control a sunbeam, in a manner subservient to the progress
of the fine arts: and by which means a man performs in a minute, the
work which a short time since would have employed the most active
years of a lifetime.

While every science, every art is being developed; while the mind is
awakened to new thought; while the windows of heaven are opened, as it
were, and the profound depths of human intellect are stirred--moved
from the foundation on all other subjects, religious knowledge seems
at a stand still.

The _creeds_ of the Fathers seem to have been cast in the mould of
other ages, to be adapted to a more narrow sphere of intellectual
development, and to be composed of material too much resembling cast
iron; or, at least, not sufficiently elastic to expand with the
expansion of mind, to grow with the growth, and advance with the
progressive principles of the age.

For these reasons, perhaps more than any other, the master spirits of
the age are breaking loose from the old moorings, and withdrawing from
established and venerated systems, by which means society is
distracted, divided, broken up, thrown, as it were, into a chaos of
confused, disorganized individualization, without a standard or
rallying point, without a nucleus by which to concentrate or
re-organise this chaotic mass, these atoms of thought.

One thing is certain--according to ancient prophecy, and agreeable to
the general expectation of this and other ages, the day approaches
which will flood the earth with the pure principles of religious
knowledge; a day when none will have to teach his neighbour, saying,
Know ye the Lord; for all persons shall know Him, from the least to
the greatest.

It should be a matter of serious thought and investigation--without
respect to party, sect, or creed, whether there should not, in the
very nature of present circumstances, and future Millennial hopes, be
an entire remodelling, or re-organization of religious society, upon
the broad basis of revealed knowledge, tangible fact, and
philosophical, scientific and spiritual Truth--a universal
"_standard_," of immutable Truth, instead of numberless systems
founded on uncertainty, opinion, mere human impression, or conjecture.

Can anything short of such a standard unite society, enlighten the
world, establish real peace, brotherhood and fellowship, and put a
final end to all religious ignorance, superstition, jargon, or
discord? Is not a difference of opinion, or a disagreement on any
given subject, a proof positive of existing ignorance, or want of
light or information, on the part of the parties disagreeing? If so,
the present age is certainly in the dark, or, in a great measure,
ignorant on religious subjects. A knowledge of the Truth can alone
bring the desired union, and bid discord cease. If the Scriptures be
true, it is not religious _opinion_ which will cover the earth, and
universally pervade every bosom, but it is, a KNOWLEDGE, "The
knowledge of God." "_God is Truth_." To _know_ Him, is to know the
Truth.

The present Volume aims to embody, in a concise and somewhat original
manner and style, a general view of the Science of Theology, as
gathered from revelation, history, prophecy, reason and analogy.

If the Work proves an introductory key to some of the first principles
of the divine science of which it treats; if it serves to open the
eyes of any of his fellowmen, on the facts of the past, the present,
and the future; if it leads to investigation and inquiry, and calls
public attention to the greater and more particular truths which have
been, or are about to be, revealed as a standard by which to unite the
people of all nations and of all religions upon the rock, the sure
foundation of divine, eternal, uncreated, infinite and exhaustless
Truth, it will have accomplished the end aimed at by

                                              THE AUTHOR.




Key to Theology.


CHAPTER I.

THEOLOGY--ITS DEFINITION--HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATIONS.


   Eternal Science! who would fathom thee
   Must launch his bark upon a shoreless sea.
   Thy knowledge yet shall overwhelm the earth,
   Thy truth to immortality to give birth;
   Thy dawn shall kindle to eternal day,
   And man, immortal, still shall own thy sway.

First. THEOLOGY is the science of communication, or of correspondence,
between God, angels, spirits, and men, by means of visions, dreams,
interpretations, conversations, inspirations, or the spirit of
prophecy and revelation.

Second. It is the science by which worlds are organized, sustained,
and directed, and the elements controlled.

Third. It is the science of knowledge, and the key and power thereof,
by which the heavens are opened, and lawful access is obtained to the
treasures of wisdom and intelligence--inexhaustible, infinite,
embracing the past, the present, and the future.

Fourth. It is the science of life--endless and eternal, by which the
living are changed or translated, and the dead raised.

Fifth. It is the science of _faith_, reformation, and remission of
sins, whereby a fallen race of mortals may be justified, cleansed, and
restored to the communion and fellowship of that Holy Spirit which is
the light of the world, and of every intelligence therein.

Sixth. It is the science of spiritual gifts, by which the blind see,
the deaf hear, the lame walk, the sick are healed, and demons are
expelled from the human system.

Seventh. It is the science of all other sciences and useful arts,
being in fact the very fountain from which they emanate. It includes
philosophy, astronomy, history, mathematics, geography, languages, the
science of letters; and blends the knowledge of all matters of fact,
in every branch of art, or of research. It includes, also, all the
scientific discoveries and inventions--agriculture, the mechanical
arts, architecture, shipbuilding, the properties and applications of
the mariner's compass, navigation, and music. All that is useful,
great, and good; all that is calculated to sustain, comfort, instruct,
edify, purify, refine, or exalt intelligences; originated by this
science, and this science alone, all other sciences being but branches
growing out of _this--root_.

Some of the facts stated in the foregoing, are beautifully illustrated
in Theological history, of which the following is an imperfect
summary--

God spake, and the worlds were framed by His word.

He spake, darkness dispersed, and light prevailed.

He commanded, and the elements--water and earth, separated, and
assumed their proper bounds.

He commanded, and the earth brought forth vegetable and animal life in
countless variety.

He commanded, and man, male and female, took upon them a tabernacle of
flesh, and prepared to multiply and perpetuate their species in the
new creation.

"The Lord God planted a garden," and thus introduced agriculture.

"He made coats of skins," hence the tailor's art.

The Lord God commanded and gave pattern for Noah's Ark, thus
introducing the art of shipbuilding.

He revealed the patterns for the Tabernacle in the wilderness, with
all its arrangements and furniture; and afterwards developed the
entire plan and all the designs of that most stupendous of all works
of art--the great Temple of Solomon, with all its furniture; thus
developing and improving the art of architecture.

The Lord God wrote with His own finger on the "tables of stone," on
Mount Sinai; thus showing that the science of letters was cultivated
and used by the highest Intelligence of the eternal heavens.

The Lord God has revealed by Ezekiel the Prophet, a plan for the
survey and division of Palestine to the Twelve Tribes of Israel, on
their return to the land of their fathers; also for laying out the new
city of Jerusalem, with its squares, blocks, public grounds, and
suburbs, and its temple.

Thus Theology includes the surveyor's art, and the planning of cities,
as well as temples, and shows that these arts are cultivated in
heaven, and that the very highest Intelligence of the Heaven of
heavens, stoops, or condescends, to grace these arts by His own
particular attention and example.

In the Revelation of John the Apostle, on the Isle of Patmos, we have
a specimen, a masterpiece, a climax of all that is great and grand in
design, and splendid and glorious in execution, in cities, thrones,
palaces, streets, pavements, outgrounds, gates, walks, squares,
fountains, rivulets, gardens, fruits, groves, specimens of dress,
poetry, song, music, marriage, bridal dress, feasting, books,
literature, public worship, prophesying, prayer, and praise, as
existing in and around the palaces of the New Jerusalem, the capital
of heaven, the seat of government of the Eternal King.

The very gates of the city are numbered and named, together with the
particular names of the precious stones forming the foundations
thereof; the gold which composed the pavement of the streets--all are
portrayed in the description.

And what is still more marvellous, all this surpassing grandeur of
design, and stupendous wisdom and display in execution, were explored,
comprehended, and described by a poor, illiterate fisherman, by the
aid of the science and arts of Theology.

Having reviewed some of the works of the great Head--the President or
First Teacher in the school of Theology, we will still continue the
historic illustrations of this wonderful science, as developed and
exemplified by the most eminent students and professors of the same.

By this science Adam obtained from his Father, the promise of the
eternal dominion over the planet on which he was placed.

By this science Enoch overcame death, and ascended to a higher sphere
of immortality and eternal life, without even being separated from his
fleshly tabernacle.

By this science Noah foretold the flood, prepared to meet the event,
and, with his family, survived the same, and became the greatest
landed proprietor since Adam.

By the perversion and unlawful use of this science king Nimrod built
the stupendous Tower of Babel, but was frustrated, and his works were
destroyed before their completion.

By this science various tongues and languages were instituted, and
colonies--the germs of nations, planted beyond the seas and in all the
earth.

By this science Abraham escaped the idolatry and priestcraft of the
Egyptians, and of the world around him; obtained a good land secured
to him and his seed by an immutable oath, covenant, and an
everlasting, unchangeable title.

By this science he conversed with angels, and was favoured with a
personal interview with the Great Head and Founder of the science, who
became his guest, and, after eating and drinking with him, blessed him
and his wife, promised them an heir in their old age, and finally, on
parting, told him His design on Sodom and its neighbourhood.

By this science Lot escaped the flames of Sodom, the knowledge being
communicated by two angels.

By this science Isaac and Jacob also obtained promises, and conversed
with angels.

By it Joseph was exalted from a dungeon to a palace, for the
salvation, from famine, of a nation and of his father's house.

By this science Moses performed his wonders in Egypt, in the Red Sea,
and in the wilderness.

By the perversion and unlawful use of this science the magicians of
Egypt withstood Moses for a time, and performed their enchantments.

By this science Joshua controlled the motions of the earth, and
lengthened out the day by a simple command.

By this science the walls of Jericho were levelled with the earth, and
the city was taken.

By this science the Jordan river was divided, while a nation crossed
dry shod, to take possession of the promised land.

By this science Elijah controlled the heavens, that it rained not for
three years and six months in Palestine. And by it he called forth and
restored rain.

By it he overthrew the priests of Baal, and the kingdom of Ahab; put
an end to the royal family of this idolatrous king; and placed Jehu on
the throne.

By it he rose, like Enoch, to a higher sphere, without returning to
dust.

By this science Samuel prophesied, raised up a mighty king and nation,
and afterwards dethroned Saul, and exalted an obscure shepherd boy to
the throne of Israel.

By this science Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and others,
foretold the fate of Babylon, Egypt, Tyre, Jerusalem, and other cities
and nations; and the exact career and final doom of Nebuchadnezzar,
Belteshazzar, Cyrus, and other great and important personages, who
were destined in turn to influence and decide the fate of nations.

By this science the furnace of fire was overcome, and the months of
lions were closed, that no harm should befall the holy men of God.

By this science Zachariah, Elizabeth, John the Baptist, Simeon, Anna,
Joseph, Mary, the wise men from the east, and the shepherds of Judea,
enjoyed visions, communion with angels, and the spirit of prophecy, so
as to understand and welcome with joy the events of the birth and
approaching ministry of Jesus Christ, when, as yet, all those not
versed in this science, were in darkness on the subject, and as liable
to reject the Saviour as to receive him.

Dreams and visions, enjoyed by means of this science, led and
protected the Son of God in all his career of mortal life.

Finally--By this same power a mighty angel descended, shook the earth,
frightened the Roman guards, rolled away the great stone, broke the
seal of the tomb, and called to life the sleeping body of Jesus
Christ.

By this power the risen Jesus, eating, drinking, and conversing with
his disciples, after his resurrection, commissioned and instructed
them in the same science, ordained them to act in the same, and to
impart its power to others, in all the world, with signs following
them that believed.

By this science he ascended to the Father, and lives for ever in the
flesh, to shed forth the gifts and powers of the same science,
according to his own will, and the will of his Father, to reign
henceforth until he descends to the earth, conquers death in a last
great conflict, and puts all enemies under his feet.

By this same power his Apostles, being clothed with the full powers of
the same on the day of Pentecost, ministered the powers and knowledge
of this science to others, both Jew and Gentile, insomuch that the
sick were healed, the blind saw, the dumb spake, the deaf heard, the
lame walked, devils were cast out, and the dead were raised, while
everywhere, dreams, visions, the ministering of angels, and the gift
of prophecy were enjoyed.




CHAPTER II.

DECLINE AND LOSS OF THIS SCIENCE AMONG THE JEWS.


    O horrid! awful! melancholy sight!
    A nation, wont to soar 'mid realms of light,
    Degraded, fallen, sunk in dark despair,
    The hiss, the scorn, the bye-word everywhere;
    No eye to pity, and no arm to save,
    Till wearied nature finds an exile's grave.

It now becomes our painful task to trace the decline of the science of
Theology and its powers among the nations, and to review the awful
consequences of such decline.

We will commence with the Jewish nation.

The science of Theology, as we have just reviewed, was enjoyed, and
its powers were wonderfully developed, under the several dispensations
called Patriarchal, Mosaic, and Jewish.

There had, however, been a great decline, a retrogression of the
powers and knowledge of the same, previous to their restoration by
John the Baptist and Jesus Christ.

This was owing to the general prevalence of sectarian principles,
divisions, precepts, commandments, and doctrines of men, by which the
Law and the Prophets were made void, and a veil was thrown over them,
or over the hearts of men, by which means they were misunderstood, or
rather, not understood at all.

It therefore became the duty of Jesus Christ and his Apostles and
Elders, as well as of his forerunner, to reprove those sects, denounce
their doctrines and traditions, and restore that which was lost in
this great science.

This restoration was at first confined strictly to the nation of the
Jews. But seeing they turned from it, and judged themselves unworthy
of eternal life, preferring their own powerless forms and doctrines,
to the science of revelation, miracles, visions, and prophecy, which
had ever illuminated the pathway of their more ancient fathers, the
Apostles turned from them, by the commandment of the Lord, and
translated this science, with its keys and legitimate powers, to the
Gentiles.

The nation had rejected and slain the Messiah, stoned the Prophets,
and imprisoned and even murdered many of the Apostles and Elders; and
Jesus had already, in tears of anguish, announced their doom--

"_O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.
For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say,
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord_."

Again, on another occasion, the Messiah uttered his voice,
saying--"_There shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon
this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall
be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden
down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled_."

Again he spake, concerning the Temple, saying--"_There shall net be
left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down_."

All these things, foretold by the science of Theology, were fulfilled
in that generation. And Jerusalem has been destroyed, trodden down by
the Gentiles, and the Jews have remained in captivity among the
nations until now.

Our readers will readily discern the entire loss of the science and
powers of Theology among this nation; the time, circumstances, and
reasons of its decline; and the time or circumstances which will
restore it unto them.

They lost it when, by the hand of the Apostles, it was taken from them
and given to the Gentiles.

The result was, the destruction of their city and temple, and of their
national existence.

Their temple, priesthood, and offerings were no longer attended by
divine power. Its outward forms were, therefore, of no possible use.

From that very time to the present--One thousand eight hundred and
fifty-one of the Christian era, the voice of a Prophet has not been
heard among the Jews.

Angels have not ministered unto them.

There has been no vision from the Lord.

No dream or interpretation.

No answer by Urim or Thummim.

No Prophet.

No voice.

No sound.

No reproof.

No comforting whisper.

All is silence--stillness--solemn blackness of despair.

All is as the similitude and shadow of death.

Oh the weariness, the painful suspense, the watchings, the wanderings,
the anxieties, the pains and sorrows of eighteen centuries! Oh the
mist of ages which has shrouded a nation as it were in the gloom of an
endless night!

When--O when, will their day dawn, and the day star of their ancient
science appear above the horizon, disperse the cloud, and usher in the
morning of a brighter day?

_When the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled_.

When they shall welcome a messenger in the name of the Lord.




CHAPTER III.

PROGRESS, DECLINE, AND FINAL LOSS OF THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY AMONG THE
GENTILES--FORESHADOWINGS OF ITS RESTORATION FOR THE USHERING IN OF THE
MILLENNIUM.


    Oh Mystic Babel, long has been thy reign!
    What direful evils follow in thy train!
    The veil is rent--thy mystery revealed,
    Angels cry wo! and God thy doom has sealed.
    The nations, from thy long and dreary night,
    Are waking now to everlasting light.

Returning to the Gentile Church, we find the science of Theology, with
all its miraculous powers of visions, dreams, angels, revelations,
prophecy, healings, &c., everywhere enjoyed. It had abated none of its
powers, in its transition from Jew to Gentile. The wild branches,
being engrafted into the good old stock, immediately partook of the
root and fatness of the tame olive tree, and thus was produced the
natural fruit.

But Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, in his writings to the
Romans, cautioned them to beware lest they should fall away after the
same example as the Jews had done before them.

Said he--"_If God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he
also spare not thee_."

John the Apostle also predicted the rise and universal sway of a
certain mystical power, a Babel of spiritual or religious confusion,
in short--"_Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and
abominations of the earth_."

This power should bear rule among all nations. The kings and rulers of
the earth should be drunken with the wine of her fornication. The
merchants of the earth should become rich through the abundance of her
delicacies.

This power should, according to the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle
John, "_wear out the Saints of the Most High_;" "_change times and
laws_;" "_be drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the martyrs of Jesus_;" "_destroy the mighty and the holy people_;"
"_make war with the Saints, and overcome them_" until a set time.

All these predictions, and many others, foretell the doom of the
Gentile Church--its destruction from the earth, and the consequent
decline and cessation of the science of Theology, and of its powers
and blessings in the Gentile world.

Connected with these predictions, we have the most positive prophetic
declarations of Holy Writ concerning the overthrow and entire
destruction of this same mystical power, which had made war with the
Saints.

Its judgments are set forth as far more terrible than those which
befell Jerusalem. Plague, pestilence, sword, earthquake, and the flame
of devouring fire will cause her to cease to be.

Then will usher in the kingdom of our God, and the power of His
Christ. Then will the Saints of the Most High take the kingdom, and
the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven.

Thus are to be revived the ancient powers and blessings, the knowledge
and wisdom, of the science of Theology.

In the fulfilment of the foregoing predictions, the science of
Theology declined, and passed away from among the Gentiles, just in
proportion as the Church, or the Saints of the Most High, were warred
against and overcome.

For years, centuries, ages, there has been no voice from heaven among
the Gentiles, any more than among the Jews. They have fallen "_after
the same example of unbelief_," notwithstanding the caution of their
great Apostle.

No Gentile Prophet has arisen and uttered his voice.

No kind angel has ministered to them.

No vision from the Lord.

No answer.

No inspired dream.

No voice.

No sound from the heavens.

No revelation has burst upon the silence of midnight darkness which
has brooded over the nations.

Or, if such voice, such vision, such Prophet has occasionally burst
forth with the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of prophecy, his
testimony has been unheeded by the mass of the people called
Christians, his voice silenced in death, or himself and his followers
have been banished from society, to wander in the mountains, forests,
caves, or deserts of the earth; or, on the other hand, compelled to
drag out an existence in the solitude of the dungeon.

Ages, centuries have passed, and Oh! what suffering! what torture!
what rivers of tears! what oceans of blood! what groanings! what
strong crying and tears on the earth! what prayers in heaven!

"How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our
blood, on them that dwell on the earth?"

The fire consumed.

The sword devoured.

Hell's artillery bellowed.

Devils hugely grinned.

Widows and orphans mourned.

Heaven wept.

Saints prayed.

Justice stood aghast.

Mercy, retiring, dropped a tear of blood.

Angels, starting, half-drew their glittering swords.

And the Gods, in solemn council, decreed a just vengeance.

Protest upon protest! reforms and re-reforms; revolutions, struggles,
exertions of every kind, of mere human invention, have been tried, and
tried in vain. The science of Theology, with all its keys and powers,
once lost, could never, consistent with the ancient Prophetic
testimony, be restored to either Jew or Gentile, until the full time
should arrive--"_The times of restitution of all things, which God
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the world
began_."

The time for _a mighty angel to fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach to them who dwell on the earth; to every
nation, kindred, tongue, and people_. (See John's revelation.)

The time of judgment for "_Mystery Babylon_."

The times of "_the fulness of the Gentiles_."

The times for the grafting in again of the Jews, and all the natural
branches of Israel.

Then, and not till then, could the science, the keys, the powers of
Theology, be restored to man.

No individual or combined human action could obtain or restore again
these keys--this science.

A mighty angel held the keys of this science for the last days. A
mighty angel was to restore the keys of the ancient Priesthood,
Apostleship, power and blessings. A voice from heaven was to reveal
the time, and send forth the cry--"_Come out of her my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her
iniquities_."

All the darkness of the middle ages; all the priestcraft or kingcraft
of every age, since the slaughter of the Apostles; all the
oppressions, persecutions, or abuses of power; all the extravagancies
and idleness on the one hand, and all the sufferings and miseries of
the toiling millions for want of the comforts of life, on the other;
all the ignorance, superstitions, errors, divisions and contentions
which have transpired in the name of "_Christianity_" down to the
present time; have been the results of the decline, and loss of the
keys and powers, of the science of Theology, or for want of attention
to them when existing on the earth.

Nor will the "_Christian_" world ever attain to any considerable
degree of knowledge, power, or union in religious progress, until they
discover their loss of this science, become sensible of the need of
its restoration, and humble themselves as in the dust, and welcome a
messenger who comes in the name of the Lord, with a commission from
heaven, and with keys committed by the Angels of God--a new Apostolic
commission, a restoration of the Kingdom and Church, and power and
gifts of God; a new dispensation, universally proclaimed in all the
world, with power and signs following; and the whole consummated by
the glorious restoration of Israel and Judah to their own land and
nationality, and to the true fold of God; together with the second
advent of Messiah and all his Saints with him, to overthrow "Mystery
Babylon," and reign on the earth.

Such are the events, such is the remedy for the past and present
evils.




CHAPTER IV.

RISE, PROGRESS, DECLINE, AND LOSS OF THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY ON THE
WESTERN HEMISPHERE, AS BROUGHT TO LIGHT BY THE LATE DISCOVERY OF
ANCIENT AMERICAN RECORDS.


    The spirit world is moved, the silence broken,
    The ancient Seers from out the ground have spoken.
    The appointed years on time's fleet wings have fled.
    And voices whisper from the ancient dead.
    Volumes of truth the sacred archives yield.
    The past, the glorious future, stand revealed.

We are now, of necessity, carried back in our research to the cradle
of nations, the Tower of Babel, in order to trace the history of this
wonderful science, from the first emigration of a colony to the
western hemisphere, till its final decline and overthrow, for the
knowledge of which we are indebted to many ancient records, written by
the fathers, or ancient students and professors of this science, on
the western hemisphere.

Among these we will make honourable mention of the Prophets Jared,
Ether, Lehi, Nephi, Mosiah, Alma, Abinadi, Mormon, and Moroni, who
wrote and prophesied in the western hemisphere, during the several
ages intervening between the time of the dispersion at Babel, and the
fifth century of the Christian era.

By the science of Theology Jared and his brother led a colony from the
great tower to the sea coast, conversing with the Lord, and walking by
the light of His revelations on the way.

By this science they were instructed in the building of eight barges
similar to the ark of Noah.

By this science their leader saw God, face to face, and talked with
Him in plain humility, as one man talks with another, thus obtaining a
knowledge of His future coming and Kingdom, and of the great events of
all ages and generations.

By this science they were preserved on the great waters three hundred
and forty-four days, and were then landed, with their eight barges, in
the western hemisphere, together with their women, children, cattle,
and seeds of every kind.

By this science they became a great nation, peopling the entire
continent, and enjoying all the blessings of civilization and heavenly
light.

By the abuse and neglect of it they were at length exterminated, in
the days of their Prophet Ether, who lived about six hundred years
before Christ came in the flesh.

By this science the Prophets Lehi and Nephi came out with a colony
from Jerusalem, in the days of Jeremiah the Prophet, and after
wandering for eight years in the wilderness of Arabia, came to the sea
coast, built a vessel, obtained from the Lord a compass to guide them
on the way, and finally landed in safety on the coast of what is now
called Chili, in South America.

By this science they also became a great nation, enjoyed many visions,
had the ministering of angels, and of many Prophets, by which means
they knew of the coming, birth, ministry, death, resurrection, and
ascension of Jesus Christ.

By this science they also enjoyed a personal visit of the risen
Redeemer, who descended from heaven in their presence, taught them his
Gospel, chose and ordained twelve of their number as Apostles, and
prophesied many things.

By this science these twelve and others established the Gospel,
Church, and ordinances of God throughout the entire western
hemisphere.

By this science their sick were healed, demons were expelled, the lame
walked, the blind saw, the dumb spake, the deaf heard, and their dead
were raised.

By this science three of those Apostles, having a change wrought upon
them, tarried in the flesh upon the earth, ministered the Gospel and
its blessings nearly four hundred years, and then withdrew from the
people because of their iniquity, took away the keys of Apostleship
and of the Gospel, and its powers, sealed up the records, and caused
the work of healing, and of gifts and miracles, to cease from among
the people, because of iniquity, bloodshed, and persecution.

By this science they yet live in the flesh upon the earth, holding
keys of Apostleship and power upon the western hemisphere, being now
about one thousand eight hundred years old.

By this science (being held in reserve above the powers of mystery
Babylon,) they will soon go forth, prophesying, preaching the Gospel,
and doing mighty signs and wonders in the midst of all nations, in
order to complete and mature the Gentile fulness, and restore the
tribes of Israel. Nor is this all--John, the beloved disciple among
the Jews, is yet alive in the flesh, and is held in reserve, to
"_prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and
kings_" as it is written.

But to return to our history of the western hemisphere. After the
science of Theology had ceased to be cultivated and enjoyed among this
branch of Israel, terrible wars and bloodshed ensued. Governments and
civilization were broken up, cities and countries were overthrown, all
records and vestiges of truth were diligently sought and destroyed, as
far as obtained.

And, finally, the whole face of the country was soaked, as it were, in
blood, and strewed with the dead and dying.

The wild beasts of the forest and fowls of heaven devoured their
flesh, and their bones were left to moulder unburied.

In other instances bodies were heaped up, and covered with mounds of
earth.

All government became extinct, and the countries overrun by tribes and
bands of robbers at war with each other.

In this situation the records of Moroni leave them, in the fifth
century of the Christian era, and much in the same situation, with
some exceptions, the Europeans found them after the lapse of another
thousand years.

Oh! who can contemplate the disgusting deformity, the dark features,
the filthy habits, the idleness, the cruelty, the nakedness, the
poverty, the misery, the sufferings, the ignorance of the descendants
of this once favoured branch of the royal blood of Abraham and Joseph,
and not weep for very anguish, while his bosom yearns, and the
fountains--the depths of his inmost soul, are stirred and moved within
him!

Reader, _all these things have come upon them, on account of the
abuses, the consequent decline, and final loss of the keys and powers,
of the science of Theology_.

But comfort your heart, their redemption is at the door.




CHAPTER V.

KEYS OF THE MYSTERIES OF THE GODHEAD.


    Eternal Father, Being without end!
    Thy glorious fulness who can comprehend!
    Thine own infinitude alone is fraught
    With attributes to swell a human thought,
    To grasp thy knowledge, or thy nature scan.
    As Father of the endless race of man.

"_This is life eternal: to know the only true and living God, and
Jesus Christ whom he hath sent_."

Since the decline of the science of Theology, a mystery, dark and
deep, has shrouded the human mind, in regard to the person and nature
of the Eternal Father, and of Jesus Christ, His son.

Councils of the fathers, and wise men of Christendom, have assembled
again and again, in order to solve the mystery of Godliness, and fix
some standard or creed upon which all parties might rest and be
agreed.

This, however, was not in their power. It is impossible for the world
by its wisdom to find out God. "_Neither knoweth any man the Father
save the son, and he to whomsoever the son will reveal him_."

The key to the science of Theology, is the key of divine revelation.
Without this key, no man, no assemblage of men, ever did, or ever will
know the Eternal Father, or Jesus Christ.

When the key of revelation was lost to man, the knowledge of God was
lost. And as life eternal depended on the knowledge of God, of course
the key of eternal life was also lost.

Oh the mysteries, the absurdities, the contentions, the quarrels, the
bloodshed, the infidelity, the senseless and conflicting theories,
which have grown and multiplied among sectaries on this subject!

Among these theories, we will notice one, which is, perhaps, more
extensively received by different sects than any other. The language
runs thus--"_There is one only living and true God, without body,
parts, or passions; consisting of three persons--the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost_."

It is painful to the human mind to be compelled to admit, that such
wonderful inconsistencies of language or ideas, have ever found place
in any human creed. Yet, so it is.

It is but another way of saying, that there is a God who does not
exist, a God who is composed of nonentity, who is the negative of all
existence, who occupies no space, who exists in no time, who is
composed of no substance, known or unknown, and who has no powers or
properties in common with any thing or being known to exist, or which
can possibly be conceived of, as existing either in the heavens or on
the earth.

Such a God could never be seen, heard, or felt, by any being in the
universe.

There never has been a visible idol worshipped among men, which was so
powerless as this "_God without body, parts, or passions_."

The god of Egypt, the crocodile, could destroy.

The images of different nations could be felt and seen.

The Peruvian god, the Sun, could diffuse its genial warmth, light, and
influence.

But not so with the God without "_body, parts, or passions_."

That which has no parts, has no whole.

Beings which have no passions, have no soul.

Before we can introduce the keys and powers of practical Theology to
the understanding of men in this age, we must, of necessity, place
within their comprehension some correct ideas of the true God.

It is written that, "_without faith it is impossible to please Him_."
Those who do not please Him, can never partake of the powers and gifts
of the science of Theology, because the keys and powers of this
science emanate from Him as a free gift, but they are never given to
those with whom He is not well pleased. The individual who would
partake of this power, must therefore have faith in Him. But how can
he believe in a being of whom he has no correct idea?

So vague, so foreign from the simple, plain truth, are the ideas of
the present age, so beclouded is the modern mind with mysticism,
spiritual nonentity, or immateriality in nearly all of its ideas of
the person or persons of the Deity, that we are constrained to use the
language of an ancient Apostle, as addressed to the learned of
Athens--"_Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship. Him declare I unto
you_."

Although there are facts in our own existence, which are beyond our
present comprehension or capacity, which is true, in a higher sense,
in relation to the Godhead, still the limited knowledge we are able to
comprehend in relation to ourselves, may at least be rational, and be
as clearly conveyed and understood as any other subject. So with our
knowledge of Deity. Although there are facts beyond our reach in
relation to His existence, attributes, and power, yet that which we
may know and comprehend or express of Him, should be divested of all
mystery, and should be as clearly conceived, expressed, and conveyed
as any other item of truth or of science.

Jesus Christ, a little babe like all the rest of us have been, grew to
be a man, was filled with a divine substance or fluid, called the Holy
Spirit, by which he comprehended and spake the truth in power and
authority; and by which he controlled the elements, and imparted
health and life to those who were prepared to partake of the same.

This man died, being put to death by wicked men.

He arose from the dead the third day, and appeared to his disciples.
These disciples, on seeing him, supposed him to be a spirit only.

They may have possessed some of the vague ideas of men in more modern
times, in regard to an immaterial existence beyond the grave: an
existence unconnected with any real or tangible matter, or substance.

But their risen Lord adopted the most simple means of dispersing their
_mysticism_, their _spiritual vagaries_ or _immateriality_. He called
upon them to handle him and see, "_For_" said he, "_a spirit hath not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have_."

They accordingly handled him, examined the prints of the nails in his
hands and feet, and the mark of the spear in his side. But, as if this
was not enough in order to familiarize them still more with the facts
of a material or tangible immortality, he ate and drank with
them--partaking of a broiled fish and an honey-comb.

In short, he was with them for forty days, in which he walked, talked,
ate, drank, taught, prophesied, commanded, commissioned, reasoned with
and blessed them, thus familiarizing to them that immortality and
eternal life which he wished them to teach in all the world.

He then ascended up in their presence, toward that planet where dwelt
his Father and their Father, his God and their God.

While he was yet in sight in the open firmament, and they stood gazing
upward, behold! two men stood by them in white raiment, and said--

"_Ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven_."

Here, then, we have a sample of an immortal God--a God who is often
declared in the Scriptures to be like his father, "_being the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person_," and
possessing the same attributes as his Father, in all their fulness; a
God not only possessing body and parts, but flesh and bones, and
sinews, and all the attributes, organs, senses, and affections of a
perfect man.

He differs in nothing from his Father, except in age and authority,
the Father having the seniority, and, consequently, the right,
according to the Patriarchal laws of eternal Priesthood, to preside
over him, and over all his dominions, for ever and ever.

While on the one hand, this God claims affinity and equality, as it
were, with his Father, he claims, on the other hand, affinity and
equality with his brethren, on the earth, with this difference,
however, that his person is a specimen of Divine, eternal Humanity,
immortalized, and with attributes perfected; while his brethren who
dwell in mortal flesh, although children of the same royal Parent in
the heavens, are not yet immortalized, as it regards their fleshly
tabernacles, and are not perfected in their attributes; and although
joint heirs, are younger, he being the first born among many brethren
in the spiritual world. They are therefore subject to him.

But every man who is eventually made perfect--raised from the dead,
and filled, or quickened, with a fulness of celestial glory, will
become like them in every respect, physically, and in intellect,
attributes or powers.

The very germs of these Godlike attributes, being engendered in man,
the offspring of Deity, only need cultivating, improving, developing,
and advancing by means of a series of progressive changes, in order to
arrive at the fountain "_Head_," the standard, the climax of Divine
Humanity.

The difference between Jesus Christ and his Father is this--one is
subordinate to the other, does nothing of himself, independently of
the Father, but does all things in the name and by the authority of
the Father, being of the same mind in all things. The difference
between Jesus Christ and another immortal and celestial man is
this--the man is subordinate to Jesus Christ, does nothing in and of
himself, but does all things in the name of Christ, and by his
authority, being of the same mind, and ascribing all the glory to him
and his Father.

On account of the double relationship of Jesus Christ--with God the
Father on one hand, and with man on the other, many have adopted the
creed, that "_Two whole and perfect natures_" were blended in the
person of Jesus Christ; that he was every way a God, and every way a
man; as if God and man were two distinct species. This error came by
reason of not knowing ourselves. For just in proportion as we
comprehend ourselves in our true light, and our relationships and
affinities with the past, present and future, with time and eternity,
with Gods, angels, spirits and men, who have gone before us, and who
will come after us, so, in proportion, we may be able to benefit by
the keys of the mysteries of the Godhead, or, in other words, to know
and comprehend Jesus Christ and his Father.

Gods, angels and men, are all of one species, one race, one great
family widely diffused among the planetary systems, as colonies,
kingdoms, nations, &c.

The great distinguishing difference between one portion of this race
and another, consists in the varied grades of intelligence and purity,
and also in the variety of spheres occupied by each, in the series of
progressive being.

An immortal man, possessing a perfect organization of spirit, flesh,
and bones, and perfected in his attributes, in all the fulness of
celestial glory, is called _a God_.

An immortal man, in progress of perfection, or quickened with a lesser
degree of glory, is called _an angel_.

An immortal spirit of man, not united with a fleshly tabernacle, is
called a spirit.

An immortal man, clothed with a mortal tabernacle, is called a man.

It may then consistently enough be said, that there are, in a
subordinate sense, a plurality of Gods, or rather of the sons of God;
although there is one Supreme Head, who is over all, and through all,
and in all His sons, by the power of His Spirit.

Jesus Christ and his Father are two persons, in the same sense as John
and Peter are two persons. Each of them has an organized, individual
tabernacle, embodied in material form, and composed of material
substance, in the likeness of man, and possessing every organ, limb,
and physical part that man possesses.

There is no more mystery connected with their oneness, than there is
in the oneness of Enoch and Elijah, or of Paul and Silas.

Their oneness consists of a oneness of spirit, intelligence,
attributes, knowledge, or power.

If Enoch, Elijah, Abraham, Peter, Paul, and millions of others ever
attain to the immortal life, and their fleshly tabernacles be
quickened by a fulness of celestial life and light, intelligence and
power, then it can be said of them, _they are one, as the Father and
Son are one_.

It could then be said of each of them, in him dwells all the fulness
of the powers and attributes of the Eternal God, or, in other words,
he possesses endless life, together with all intelligence, knowledge,
light, and power. He therefore has the same mind as all the others--is
in communication and in perfect union with each and all of them.

All these are Gods, or sons of God--they are the Kings, Princes,
Priests, and Nobles of Eternity. But over them all there is a
Presidency or Grand Head, who is the Father of all. And next unto him
is Jesus Christ, the eldest born, and first heir of all the realms of
light.

Every person knows, by reflection, that intelligence may be imparted
without diminishing the store possessed by the giver. Therefore it
follows, that millions of individual beings may each receive all the
attributes of eternal life, and light, and power.

Again it follows, that in the use of this power, by consent and
authority of the head, any one of these Gods may create, organize,
people, govern, control, exalt, glorify and enjoy worlds on worlds,
and the inhabitants thereof; or, in other words, each of them can find
room in the infinitude of space, and unoccupied chaotic elements in
the boundless storehouse of eternal riches, with which to erect for
himself thrones, principalities, and powers, over which to reign in
still increasing might, majesty and dominion, for ever and ever.

All these are kingdoms which, together with their Kings, are in
subordination to the great Head and Father of all, and to Jesus Christ
the first born, and first heir, among the sons of God.

All these kingdoms, with all their intelligences, are so many
acquisitions to _His_ dominion who is Lord of lords, and King of
kings, and of whom it is written, by the Prophet Isaiah, "Of the
increase of his kingdom there shall be no end."

All these are so many colonies of our race, multiplied, extended,
transplanted, and existing for ever and ever, as occupants of the
numberless planetary systems which do now exist, or which will roll
into order, and be peopled by the operations of the Holy Spirit, in
obedience to the mandates of the sons of God.

These kingdoms present every variety and degree in the progress of the
great science of life, from the lowest degradation amid the realms of
death, or the rudimental stages of elementary existence, upward
through all the ascending scale, or all the degrees of progress in the
science of eternal life and light, until some of them in turn arise to
thrones of eternal power.

Each of these Gods, including Jesus Christ and his Father, being in
possession of not merely an organized spirit, but a glorious immortal
body of flesh and bones, is subject to the laws which govern, of
necessity, even the most refined order of physical existence.

All physical element, however embodied, quickened, or refined, is
subject to the general laws necessary to all existence.

Some of these laws are as follows--

First. Each atom, or embodiment of atoms, necessarily occupies a
certain amount of space.

Second. No atom, or embodiment of atoms, can occupy the identical
space occupied by other atoms or bodies.

Third. Each individual organized intelligence must possess the power
of self motion to a greater or less degree.

Fourth. All voluntary motion implies an inherent will, to originate
and direct such motion.

Fifth. Motion, of necessity, implies that a certain amount of time is
necessary, in passing from one portion of space to another.

These laws are absolute and unchangeable in their nature, and apply to
all intelligent agencies which do or can exist.

They, therefore, apply with equal force to the great, supreme, eternal
Father of the heavens and of the earth, and to His meanest subjects.

It is, therefore, an absolute impossibility for God the Father, or
Jesus Christ, to be everywhere personally present.

The omnipresence of God must therefore be understood in some other way
than of His bodily or personal presence.

This leads to the investigation of that substance called the Holy
Spirit.

As the mind passes the boundaries of the visible world, and enters
upon the confines of the more refined and subtle elements, it finds
itself associated with certain substances in themselves invisible to
our gross organs, but clearly manifested to our intellect by their
tangible operations and effects.

The very air we breathe, although invisible to our sight, is clearly
manifested to our sense of feeling. Its component parts may be
analyzed. Nay more, the human system itself is an apparatus which
performs a chemical process upon that element. It is received into the
system by the act of respiration, and there immediately undergoes the
separation of its component parts.

The one part, retained and incorporated in the animal system, diffuses
life and animation, by supplying the necessary animal heat, &c., while
the other part, not adapted to the system, is discharged from the
lungs to mingle with its native element.

There are several of these subtle, invisible substances but little
understood as yet by man, and their existence is only demonstrated by
their effects. Some of them are recognized under the several terms,
electricity, galvanism, magnetism, animal magnetism, spiritual
magnetism, essence, spirit, &c.

The purest, most refined and subtle of all these substances, and the
one least understood, or even recognized, by the less informed among
mankind, is that substance called the Holy Spirit.

This substance, like all others, is one of the elements of material or
physical existence, and therefore subject to the necessary laws which
govern all matter, as before enumerated.

Like the other elements, its whole is composed of individual
particles. Like them, each particle occupies space, possesses the
power of motion, requires time to move from one part of space to
another, and can in no wise occupy two spaces at once. In all these
respects it differs nothing from all other matter.

This substance is widely diffused among the elements of space. This
Holy Spirit, under the control of the Great Eloheim, is the grand
moving cause of all intelligences, and by which they act.

This is the great, positive, controlling element of all other
elements. It is omnipresent by reason of the infinitude of its
particles, and it comprehends all things.

It is the controlling agent or executive, which organizes and puts in
motion all worlds, and which, by the mandate of the Almighty, or of
any of His commissioned agents, performs all the mighty wonders, signs
and miracles, ever manifested in the name of the Lord--the turning of
the earth backward on its axis, the dividing of the sea, the removing
of a mountain, the raising of the dead, or the healing of the sick.

It penetrates the pores of the most solid substances, pierces the
human system to its most inward recesses, discerns the thoughts and
intents of the heart. It has power to move through space with an
inconceivable velocity, far exceeding the tardy motions of
electricity, or of physical light.

It comprehends the past, present, and future, in all their fulness.
Its inherent properties embrace all the attributes of intelligence and
affection.

It is endowed with knowledge, wisdom, truth, love, charity, justice,
and mercy, in all their ramifications.

In short, it is the attributes of the eternal power and Godhead.

Those beings who receive of its fulness are called sons of God,
because they are perfected in all its attributes and powers, and being
in communication with it, can, by its use, perform all things.

Those beings who receive not a fulness, but a measure of it, can know
and perform some things, but not all.

This is the true light, which in some measure illuminates all men. It
is, in its less refined particles, the physical light which reflects
from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances; and by reflection
on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world.

It is, also, in its higher degrees, the intellectual light of our
inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge,
compare, comprehend and remember the subjects within our reach.

Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man,
vision in the Prophets, and is continually flowing from the Godhead
throughout all His creatures.

Such is the Godhead, as manifested in His words, and in His works. He
dwells in His own eternal palaces of precious stones and gold, in the
Royal City of the heavenly Jerusalem.

He sits enthroned in the midst of all His creations, and is filled and
encircled with light unapproachable by those of the lower spheres.

He associates with myriads of His own begotten sons and daughters who,
by translation or resurrection, have triumphed over death.

His ministers are sent forth from His presence to all parts of His
dominions.

His Holy Spirit centres in His presence, and communicates with, and
extends to the utmost verge of His dominions, comprehending and
controlling all things under the immediate direction of His own will,
and the will of all those in communication with Him, in worlds without
end!




CHAPTER VI.

ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE.


    Boundless infinitude of time, and space,
    And elements eternal! Who can trace
    Earth with its treasures, Heaven with its spheres,
    Time's revolutions, eternity's years?
    But what are all these, when measured by thee,
    But marks on thy dial, or motes on thy sea!

The idea of a God without "body, parts, or passions," is not more
absurd or inconsistent than that modern popular doctrine, that all
things were created from nonentity, or in other words, that something
originated from nothing.

It is a self-evident truth, which will not admit of argument, that
nothing remains nothing. Nonentity is the negative of all existence.
This negative possesses no property or element upon which the energies
of creative power can operate.

This mysticism must, therefore, share the fate of the other mysteries
of false Theology and philosophy, which have for ages shrouded the
world in the sable curtains of a long and dreary night. It must
evaporate and disappear as a mere creation of fancy, while, in its
place, are introduced the following self-evident and incontrovertible
facts--

First. There has always existed a boundless infinitude of space.

Second. Intermingled with this space there exists all the varieties of
the elements, properties, or things of which intelligence takes
cognizance; which elements or things taken altogether compose what is
called the Universe.

Third. The elements of all these properties or things are eternal,
uncreated, self-existing. Not one particle can be added to them by
creative power. Neither can one particle be diminished or annihilated.

Fourth. These eternal, self-existing elements possess in themselves
certain inherent properties or attributes, in a greater or less
degree; or, in other words, they possess intelligence, adapted to
their several spheres.

These elements have been separated, by philosophers, into two grand
divisions, viz.--

                     "PHYSICAL AND SPIRITUAL."

To a mind matured, or quickened with a fulness of intelligence, so as
to be conversant with all the elements of nature, there is no use for
the distinction implied in such terms.

To speak more philosophically, all the elements are spiritual, all are
physical, all are material, tangible realities. Spirit is matter, and
matter is full of spirit. Because all things which do exist are
eternal realities, in their elementary existence.

Who then can define the precise point, in the scale of elementary
existence, which divides between the physical and spiritual kingdoms?
There are eyes which can discern the most refined particles of
elementary existence. There are hands and fingers to whose refined
touch all things are tangible.

In the capacity of mortals, however, some of the elements are
tangible, or visible, and others invisible. Those which are tangible
to our senses, we call physical; those which are more subtle and
refined, we call spiritual.

Spirit is intelligence, or the light of truth, which filleth all
things.

Its several emotions or affections, such as love, joy, &c., are but so
many actions or motions of these elements, as they operate in their
several spheres.

By these actions or emotions the elements manifest their eternal
energies, attributes, or inherent powers.

In contemplating the works of creation, then, the student must not
conceive the idea that space, or time, or element, or intelligence,
was originated, but rather, that these are eternal, and that they
constitute the energies which act, and the things acted upon,
including the place and time of action.

The whole vast structure of universal organized existence, presents
undeniable evidence of three facts, viz.--

First. The eternal existence of the elements of which it is composed.

Second. The eternal existence of the attributes of intelligence, and
wisdom to design.

Third. The eternal existence of power, to operate upon and control
these eternal elements, so as to carry out the plans of the designer.

It will be recollected that the last chapter recognizes a family of
Gods, or, in other words, a species of beings, who have physical
tabernacles of flesh and bones, in the form of man, but so constructed
as to be capable of eternal life; that these tabernacles are
quickened, or animated by a fulness of that holiest of all elements,
which is called the Holy Spirit, which element or spirit, when
organized, in individual form, and clothed upon with flesh and bones
in the highest possible refinement, contains, in itself, a fulness of
the attributes of light, intelligence, wisdom, love, and power; also
that there are vast quantities of this spirit or element not organized
in bodily forms, but widely diffused among the other elements of
space.

A General Assembly, Quorum, or Grand Council of the Gods, with their
President at their head, constitute the designing and creating power.

The motive power, which moves to action this grand creative power, is
wisdom, which discovers a use for all these riches, and inspires the
carrying out of all the designs in an infinite variety of utility and
adaptation.

Wisdom inspires the Gods to multiply their species and to lay the
foundation for all the forms of life, to increase in numbers, and for
each to enjoy himself in the sphere to which he is adapted, and in the
possession and use of that portion of the elements necessary to his
existence and happiness.

In order to multiply organized bodies, composed of spiritual element,
worlds and mansions composed of spiritual element would be necessary
as a home, adapted to their existence and enjoyment. As these
spiritual bodies increased in numbers, other spiritual worlds would be
necessary, on which to transplant them.

Again. In order to enable these organized spirits to take upon them a
fleshly tabernacle, physical worlds, with all their variety and
fulness, would be necessary for their homes, food, clothing, &c., that
they might be begotten, sustained, and born, that they might live,
die, and rise again to receive their inheritances on their respective
earths.

Hence the great work of regeneration of worlds, or the renovation and
adaptation of the elements to the resurrection and eternal state of
man, would also be endless, or eternally progressive.

Through every form of life, and birth, and change, and resurrection,
and every form of progress in knowledge and experience, the candidates
for eternal life must look upon the elements as their home; hence the
elements, upon the principle of adaptation, must keep pace with the
possessors who use them, in all the degrees of progressive refinement.

While room is found in infinite space:

While there are particles of unorganized element in Nature's
storehouse:

While the trees of Paradise yield their fruits, or the Fountain of
Life its river:

While the bosoms of the Gods glow with affection:

While eternal charity endures, or eternity itself rolls its successive
ages, the heavens will multiply, and new worlds and more people be
added to the kingdoms of the Fathers.

Thus, in the progress of events, unnumbered millions of worlds, and of
systems of worlds, will necessarily be called into requisition, and be
filled by man, and beast, and fowl, and tree, and all the vast
varieties of beings, and things which ever budded and blossomed in
Eden, or thronged the hills and valleys of the celestial Paradise.

When, in the endless progression of events, the full time had arrived
for infinite wisdom to organize and people this globe which we
inhabit, the chaotic elements were arranged in order. It appears at
the commencement of this grand work, that the elements, which are now
so beautifully arranged and adapted to vegetable and animal life, were
found in a state of chaos, entirely unadapted to the uses they now
serve.

There was one vast mixture of elements. Earth, water, soil,
atmosphere--in short, the entire elements of which this mass was
composed, seem to have been completely compounded, or mingled into one
vast chaos, and the whole overwhelmed with a darkness so dense as to
obscure the light of heaven.

Let us turn from the contemplation of scenes so sublimely fearful.
Suffice it to say, the mandate came, darkness fled, the veil was
lifted, light pierced the gloom, and chaos was made visible. Oh what a
scene! A world without landscape, without vegetation, without animal
life, without man, or animated beings. No sound broke on the
stillness, save the voice of the moaning winds, and of dashing,
foaming waters. Again, a voice comes booming over the abyss, and
echoing amid the wastes, the mass of matter hears and trembles, and
lo! the sea retires, the muddy shapeless mass lifts its head above the
waters.

Molehills to mountains grow. Huge islands next appear, and continents
at length expand to view, with hill and vale, in one wide dreary
waste, unmeasured and untrodden.

The surface, warmed and dried by the cheering rays of the now
resplendent sun, is prepared for the first seeds of vegetation.

A Royal Planter now descends from yonder world of older date, and
bearing in his hand the choice seeds of the older Paradise, he plants
them in the virgin soil of our new born earth. They grow and flourish
there, and, bearing seed, replant themselves, and thus clothe the
naked earth with scenes of beauty, and the air with fragrant incense.
Ripening fruits and herbs at length abound. When, lo! from yonder
world is transferred every species of animal life. Male and female,
they come, with blessings on their heads; and a voice is heard again,
"_Be fruitful and multiply_."

Earth--its mineral, vegetable and animal wealth--its Paradise,
prepared, down comes from yonder world on high, a son of God, with his
beloved spouse. And thus a colony from heaven, it may be from the sun,
is transplanted on our soil. The blessings of their Father are upon
them, and the first great law of heaven and earth is again repeated,
"_Be fruitful and multiply_."

Hence, the nations which have swarmed our earth.

In after years, when Paradise was lost by sin; when man was driven
from the face of his heavenly Father, to toil, and droop, and die;
when heaven was veiled from view; and, with few exceptions, man was no
longer counted worthy to retain the knowledge of his heavenly origin;
then, darkness veiled the past and future from the heathen mind; man
neither knew himself, from whence he came, nor whither he was bound.
At length a Moses came, who knew his God, and would fain have led
mankind to know Him too, and see Him face to face. But they could not
receive His heavenly laws, or bide His presence.

Thus the holy man was forced again to veil the past in mystery, and,
in the beginning of his history, assign to man an earthly origin.

Man, moulded from the earth, as a brick!

A Woman, manufactured from a rib!

Thus, parents still would fain conceal from budding manhood, the
mysteries of procreation, or the sources of life's ever flowing river,
by relating some childish tale of new born life, engendered in the
hollow trunk of some old tree, or springing with spontaneous growth,
like mushrooms, from out the heaps of rubbish. O man! When wilt thou
cease to be a child in knowledge?

Man, as we have said, is the offspring of Deity. The entire mystery of
the past and future, with regard to his existence, is not yet solved
by mortals.

We first recognise him, as an organized individual or intelligence,
dwelling with his Father in the eternal mansions. This organized
spirit we call a body, because, although composed of the spiritual
elements, it possesses every organ after the pattern, and in the
likeness or similitude of the outward or fleshly tabernacle it is
destined eventually to inhabit. Its organs of thought, speech, sight,
hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling, &c., all exist in their order, as
in the physical body; the one being the exact similitude of the other.

This individual, spiritual body, was begotten by the heavenly Father,
in His own likeness and image, and by the laws of procreation.

It was born and matured in the heavenly mansions, trained in the
school of love in the family circle, and amid the most tender embraces
of parental and fraternal affection.

In this primeval probation, in its heavenly home, it lived and moved
as a free and rational intelligence, acting upon its own agency, and,
like all intelligence, independent in its own sphere. It was placed
under certain laws, and was responsible to its great Patriarchal Head.

This has been called a "First Estate." And it is intimated that, of
the spirits thus placed upon their agency, one-third failed to keep
their first estate, and were thrust down, and reserved in chains of
darkness, for future judgment. As these are not permitted to multiply
their species, or to move forward in the scale of progressive being,
while in this state of bondage and condemnation, we will trace them no
further, as their final destiny is not revealed to mortals.

The spirits which kept their first estate, were permitted to descend
below, and to obtain a tabernacle of flesh in the rudimental existence
in which we find them in our present world, and which we will call a
second estate.

In passing the veil which separates between the first and second
estates, man becomes unconscious, and, on awakening in his second
estate, a veil is wisely thrown over all the past.

In his mortal tabernacle he remembers not the scenes, the endearing
associations, of his first, primeval childhood in the heavenly
mansions. He therefore commences anew in the lessons of experience, in
order to start on a level with the new born tabernacle, and to
re-develope his intellectual faculties in a progressive series, which
keep pace with the development of the organs and faculties of the
outward tabernacle.

During his progress in the flesh, the Holy Spirit may gradually awaken
his faculties; and in a dream, or vision, or by the spirit of
prophecy, reveal, or rather awaken the memory to, a partial vision, or
to a dim and half defined recollection of the intelligence of the
past. He sees in part, and he knows in part; but never while
tabernacled in mortal flesh will he fully awake to the intelligence of
his former estate. It surpasses his comprehension, is unspeakable, and
even unlawful to be uttered.

Having kept his second estate, and filled the measure of his
responsibilities in the flesh, he passes the veil of death, and enters
a third estate, or probationary sphere. This is called the world of
spirits, and will be treated on more fully under its appropriate head.

Filling the measure of his responsibilities in the world of spirits,
he passes, by means of the resurrection of the body, into his fourth
estate, or sphere of human existence. In this sphere he finds himself
clothed upon with an eternal body of flesh and bones, with every
sense, and every organ, restored and adapted to their proper use.

He is thus prepared with organs and faculties adapted to the
possession and enjoyment of every element of the physical or spiritual
worlds, which can gratify the senses, or conduce to the happiness of
intelligences. He associates, converses, loves, thinks, acts, moves,
sees, hears, tastes, smells, eats, drinks and possesses.

In short, all the elements necessary to his happiness being purified,
exalted, and adapted to the sphere in which he exists, are placed
within his lawful reach, and made subservient to his use.




CHAPTER VII.

DESTINY OF THE UNIVERSE.


    The mystic future, with its depths profound,
    For ages counted as forbidden ground,
    Now lifts its veil, that man may penetrate
    The secret springs, the mysteries of fate;
    Know whence he is, and whither he is bound,
    And why the spheres perform their ample round.

The Grand Council having developed the vast structure of the heavens
and the earth, with all their fulness, with the evident design of
utility and adaptation to certain definite uses, it well becomes us to
watch their progress, and to study with diligence their future and
final destiny.

From a general traditional belief in an immaterial hereafter, many
have concluded that the earth and all material things would be
annihilated as mere temporary structures; that the material body, and
the planets it occupies, make no part of eternal life and being; in
short, that God, angels, and men, become at last so lost, dissolved,
or merged in spirituality, or immateriality, as to lose all adaptation
to the uses of the physical elements; that they will absolutely need
no footstool, habitation, possession, mansion, home, furniture, food,
or clothing; that the whole vast works and beautiful designs of the
visible creation are a kind of necessary evil or clog on the spiritual
life, and are of no possible use except to serve for the time being,
for the home and sustenance of beings in their grosser, or rudimental
state.

What a doleful picture! With what gloom and melancholy must
intelligences contemplate the vast structure, as viewed in this light!

What a vastness of design!

What a display of wisdom!

What a field of labour in execution, do the works of creation present
to the contemplative mind!

Yet all this wisdom of design, all this labour of execution, after
serving a momentary purpose, to be thrown away as an incumbrance to
real existence and happiness.

All these "spiritual," "immaterial" vagaries have no foundation in
truth.

The earth and other systems are to undergo a variety of changes, in
their progress towards perfection. Water, fire, and other elements are
the agents of these changes. But it is an eternal, unchangeable fact,
a fixed law of nature, easily demonstrated and illustrated by chemical
experiment, that neither fire nor any other element can annihilate a
particle of matter, to say nothing of a whole globe.

_A new heaven and a new earth_ are promised by the sacred writers. Or,
in other words, the planetary systems are to be changed, purified,
refined, exalted and glorified, in the similitude of the resurrection,
by which means all physical evil or imperfection will be done away.

In their present state they are adapted to the rudimental state of
man. They are, as it were, the nurseries for man's physical embryo
formation. Their elements afford the means of nourishing and
sustaining the tabernacle, and of engendering and strengthening the
organ of thought and mind, wherein are conceived and generated
thoughts and affections which can only be matured and consummated in a
higher sphere--thoughts pregnant with eternal life and love.

As the mind enlarges, the aspirations of an eternal being, once
ennobled and honoured in the councils of heaven, among the sons of
God, reach forth too high, and broad, and deep, to be longer adapted
to the narrow sphere of mortal life. His body is imprisoned, chained
to the earth, while his mind would soar aloft, and grasp the
intelligence, wisdom and riches of the boundless infinite.

His rudimental body must therefore pass away, and be changed, so as to
be adapted to a wider and more glorious sphere of locomotion,
research, action and enjoyment.

When the planet on which he dwells has conceived, brought forth, and
nourished the number of tabernacles assigned to it in its rudimental
state, by infinite wisdom, it must needs be acted upon by a chemical
process. The purifying elements; for instance, fire, must needs be
employed to bring it through an ordeal, a refinement, a purification,
a change commensurate with that which had before taken place in the
physical tabernacle of its inhabitants. Thus renovated, it is adapted
to resurrected man.

When man, and the planet on which he lives, with all its fulness,
shall have completed all their series of progressive changes, so as to
be adapted to the highest glories of which their several characters
and species are capable, then, the whole will be annexed to, or
numbered with the eternal heavens, and will there fulfil their eternal
rounds, being another acquisition to the mansions, or eternally
increasing dominions of the great Creator and Redeemer.

Worlds are mansions for the home of intelligences.

Intelligences exist in order to enjoy.

Joy, in its fulness, depends on certain principles, viz.--

Life Eternal. Love Eternal. Peace Eternal. Wealth Eternal. &c.

Without the first, enjoyment lacks durability.

Without the second, it can hardly be said to exist.

Without the third, it would not be secure.

Without the fourth, it must be limited, &c.

Eternal life, in its fulness, implies a spiritual intelligence,
embodied in the likeness of its own species and clothed upon with an
outward tabernacle of eternal, incorruptible flesh and bones. This
state of existence can only be attained by the resurrection of the
body, and its eternal re-union with the spirit.

Eternal life thus attained, and endowed with the eternal attributes of
intelligence and love, could never exercise, or derive enjoyment from
the affections of the latter, unless associated with other beings
endowed with the same attributes.

Hence the object, or necessity of eternal kindred ties, associations,
and affections, exercised as the attributes of that charity which
never ends.

The third proposition, viz.--

_Eternal Peace_, could never be secured without the development of
Eternal Law and government, which would possess in itself the
attributes of infinite truth, goodness and power.

Any government short of this, could never guarantee _Eternal Peace_.
It would be liable to be overthrown, by the lack of truth to discern,
disposition to execute, or power to enforce, the measures necessary to
insure peace.

The fourth proposition, viz.--

_Eternal Wealth_, must, of necessity, consist of an everlasting
inheritance or title, defined and secured by this eternal government,
to portions of the organized elements, in their pure, incorruptible
and eternal state.

In order to be wealthy, eternal man must possess a certain portion of
the surface of some eternal planet, adapted to his order or sphere of
existence.

This inheritance, incorruptible, eternal in the heavens, must be
sufficiently extensive for his accommodation, with all his family
dependencies. It must also comprise a variety of elements, adapted to
his use and convenience. Eternal gold, silver, precious stones, and
other precious materials would be useful in the erection and
furnishing of mansions, and of public and private dwellings or
edifices.

These edifices combined, or arranged in wisdom, would constitute
eternal cities. Gardens, groves, walks, rivulets, fountains, flowers
and fruits, would beautify and adorn the landscape, please the eye,
the taste, the smell; and thus contribute gladness to the heart of
man.

Silks, linens, or other suitable materials would be necessary to adorn
his person, and to furnish and beautify his mansions.

In short, eternal man, in possession of eternal worlds, in all their
variety and fulness, will eat, drink, think, converse, associate,
assemble, disperse, go, come, possess, improve, love and enjoy. He
will increase in riches, knowledge, power, might, majesty and
dominion, in worlds without end.

Every species of the animal creation ever organized by creative
goodness, or that ever felt the pangs of death, or uttered a groan
while subject to the king of terrors, or exulted in the joys of life
and sympathy, and longed for the redemption of the body, will have
part in the resurrection, and will live for ever in their own spheres,
in the possession of peace, and a fulness of joy, adapted to their
several capacities.

    O Child of earth, conceived in corruption!
    Brought forth in pain and sorrow! sojourning
    In a world of mourning, mid sighs and tears,
    And groans, and awaiting in sadness thy home
    In the gloomy grave, as food for worms;
    Lift up thy head, cast thine eyes around thee,
    Behold yon countless hosts of shining orbs,
    Yon worlds of light and life. Then turn to earth,
    Survey the solid globe, its mineral wealth,
    Its gems, its precious stones, its gold, its springs;
    Its gardens, forests, fruits, and flowers;
    Its countless myriads of breathing life,
    From _Mote to Man_, through all the varied scale
    Of animated being.
    Visit the gloomy caverns of the dead,
    The ancient sepulchre, where e'en the worm
    Of death himself, has died for want of food,
    And bones disjointed are crumbled fine, and
    Mingled with the dust.
    Nay, deeper still, descend the fathomless
    Abyss of souls condemned, in darkness chained,
    Or thrust in gloomy dungeons of despair--
    Where the very names of Mercy, of Hope,
    And of death's conqueror remain unknown.
    Observe with care the whole, indulge in tears,
    But hope, believe, and clothed with charity
    Which never fails, thine eyes enlightened,
    Thy person clad in light ethereal.
    Time fades, and opens on eternity.
    Again review the scene beheld before.
    You startle, seem surprised! confused! o'erwhelmed!
    Death is conquered, corruption is no more,
    All is _life_, and the word ETERNITY
    Is inscribed in characters indelible,
    On every particle and form of life.

Socrates, Plato, Confucius, and many other philosophers and divines
have written largely on the immortality of the _soul_ or spirit of
man.

Some of these have suffered, with joy and cheerfulness, imprisonment,
torture, and even death, with only this limited view of eternal
existence.

Could these martyrs to a portion of truth so limited, and yet so full
of hope and consolation, have handled immortal flesh and bones in the
persons of Enoch or Elijah translated, or of Jesus raised from the
dead; could they have learned from their sacred lips, and realized the
full import of that joyful sentence--

    "_Behold! I make all things new_;"

could they have contemplated eternal worlds, of matter in all its
elements and forms of animal life, indissoluble and everlasting; could
they have beheld eternal man, moving in the majesty of a God, amid the
planetary systems, grasping the knowledge of universal nature, and
with an intellect enlightened by the experience and observations of
thousands and even millions of years; could they have had a glimpse of
all this, and heard the promise--

    "_There shall be no more death_,"

issuing from the fountain of truth, prompted by infinite benevolence
and charity, re-echoing amid the starry worlds, reaching down to
earth, vibrating, with a thrill of joy, all the myriads of animated
nature, penetrating the gloomy vaults of death, and the prisons of the
spirit world, with a ray of hope, and causing to spring afresh, the
well-springs of life, and joy, and love, even in the lonely dungeons
of despair! O! how would their bosoms have reverberated with
unutterable joy and triumph, in view of changing worlds.

Could the rulers of this world have beheld, or even formed a
conception of, such riches, such nobility, such an eternal and
exceeding weight of glory, they would have accounted the wealth,
pleasures, honours, titles, dignities, glories, thrones,
principalities and crowns of this world as mere toys--the play-things
of a day, dross, not worth the strife and toil of acquiring, or the
trouble of maintaining, except as a duty, or troublesome
responsibility.

With this view of the subject, what man so base, so grovelling, so
blind to his own interests, as to neglect those duties, self-denials,
sacrifices, which are necessary in order to secure a part in the
_first_ resurrection, and a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory in that life which never ends?




CHAPTER VIII.

KEY OF KNOWLEDGE, POWER, AND GOVERNMENT.


    Heaven's Nobility, whom worlds obey,
    Clad in the brightness of eternal day,
    Enthroned in majesty, as "_Priests and Kings_,"
    To whom the universe its incense brings!
    Angels, its ministers! Heaven is its throne!
    The stores of infinitude are all its own!

Having given a general view of the powers, operations and effects of
Theology, as developed amongst the nations of antiquity, the mysteries
of the Godhead, the law of nature, and the origin and destiny of the
universe, the subject next in order is the KEY of knowledge, power and
government, as developed in the heavens and on the earth, for the
organization, order, peace, happiness, education, improvement, and
exaltation of intelligences in the image of God--His sons and
daughters.

The great family of man, comprising the inhabitants of unnumbered
millions of worlds, in every variety and degree of progress, consists
of five principal spheres, or grand divisions, in the scale of
progressive being, viz.--

First. _The Gods_, composed of embodied spirits, who inhabit
tabernacles of immortal flesh and bones in their most refined state,
and who are perfected in all the attributes of intelligence and power.

Second. _The Angels_, who are also composed of spirits and immortal
flesh and bones, less refined, and endowed with vast intelligence and
power, but not a fulness.

Third. _Embodied Spirits_, without a tabernacle of flesh and bones.
These are they who hate passed the veil of death, and are awaiting a
resurrection.

Fourth. _Embodied Spirits_, with mortal tabernacles, as in the present
world.

Fifth. _Embodied Spirits_, who have not yet descended to be clothed
upon with mortality, but who are candidates for the same.

There is also a sixth division, but of those we need not speak, as
they are not, as yet, included in the scale of progressive being, not
having kept their first estate.

The spirits of all men in their primeval states, were intelligent. But
among these intelligences some were more noble, that is to say, more
intelligent than others.

_And God said, these will I make rulers in my kingdoms_.[A] Upon this
principle was manifested the election, before the foundation of the
world, of certain individuals to certain offices, as written in the
Scriptures.

[Footnote A: See Book of Abraham, translated from Papyrus, lately
taken from the Catacombs of Thebes in Egypt.]

In other words, certain individuals, more intelligent than the others,
were chosen by the Head, to teach, instruct, edify, improve, govern,
and minister truth and salvation to others; and to hold the delegated
powers or keys of government, in the several spheres of progressive
being.

These were not only chosen, but set apart, by a holy ordinance in the
eternal worlds, as Embassadors, Foreign Ministers, Priests, Kings,
Apostles, &c., to fill the various stations in the vast empire of the
Sovereign of all.

Jesus Christ, being the first Apostle thus commissioned, and the
President of all the powers thus delegated, is Lord of lords, and King
of kings, in the heavens and on the earth. Hence this Priesthood is
called the Priesthood after the order of the Son of God. It holds the
keys of all the true principles of government in all worlds, being
without beginning of days or end of life. It was held by Adam, Seth,
Enoch, Noah, Shem, Melchisedec, and others. Abraham obtained this
Priesthood, and an election of the same in his seed after him to all
generations. The decree went forth in an everlasting covenant, that in
Abraham and his seed, all the nations and kindreds of the earth should
be blessed.

Of this lineage according to the flesh were the Prophets, John the
Baptist, Jesus Christ, and the Jewish Apostles. Since the covenant and
election thus manifested, the keys of revelation, government and
miraculous powers on earth have been held exclusively by the literal
descendants of this noble and royal house.

The Gentiles could partake of a portion of the same blessings, but
this could only be done through their ministry, and by adoption into
the same family.

This election or covenant with the house of Israel will continue for
ever. In the great restoration of all things, this lineage will hold
the keys of Priesthood, salvation and government, for all nations. As
saith the Prophet Isaiah--"_The nation and kingdom that will not serve
thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted_."

And again--"_Ye shall be the priests of the Lord; men shall call you
the ministers of our God: but strangers shall build your walls, and
the sons of the alien shall be your ploughmen and your vine
dressers_."

This Priesthood, including that of the Aaronic, holds the keys of
revelation of the oracles of God to man upon the earth; the power and
right to give laws and commandments to individuals, churches, rulers,
nations and the world; to appoint, ordain, and establish constitutions
and kingdoms; to appoint kings, presidents, governors or judges, and
to ordain or anoint them to their several holy callings, also to
instruct, warn, or reprove them by the word of the Lord.

It also holds the keys of the administration of ordinances for the
remission of sins, and for the gift of the Holy Spirit; to heal the
sick, cast out demons, or work miracles in the name of the Lord; in
fine, to bind or loose on earth and in heaven. For the exercise of all
which powers the student of Theology will find abundant precedents in
the sacred Scriptures.

Man holding the keys of the Priesthood and Apostleship after the order
of the Son of God, are his representatives, or embassadors, to
mankind. To receive them, to obey their instructions, to feed, clothe,
or aid them, is counted the same, in the final judgment, as if all had
been done to the Son of God in person. On the other hand, to reject
them, or their testimony or message, or the word of God through them,
in any matter, is counted the same as if done to Jesus Christ, in his
own person. Indeed, such embassadors will be the final judges of the
persons, rulers, cities or nations to whom they are sent.

Although the chosen instruments to hold the keys of this Priesthood
must be the literal lineage of Israel, yet that lineage are not all
thus commissioned, nor indeed are any of them Priests merely because
they are of the chosen seed. Such an instrument must be revealed, and
his ordination which he had before the world began, be renewed and
confirmed upon his fleshly tabernacle, or he cannot be a Priest on
earth.

One who already holds the authority, or keys of Priesthood, can
reveal, by the word of the Lord, and ordain and anoint others to
similar callings, and through these ordinances fill them with the Holy
Spirit, as a qualification for their holy calling. By this means
Joshua succeeded Moses, Elisha succeeded Elijah, &c. And by this means
the great Apostle of the Father chose and ordained the Twelve Apostles
of the Jews, and gave the keys or presidency of the kingdom to Peter.

There have, however, been times when, by a general martyrdom or
apostacy, the keys of this power have been taken from the earth, (see
chapters 2, 3, 4.) In such case there would be no longer visions,
revelations or miraculous gifts from the Lord, manifested among men,
because the Priesthood is the channel, and the ordinances are the
means, through which such blessings are enjoyed by man. In the absence
of these offices and powers, darkness, ignorance, superstition,
priestcraft and kingcraft, idolatry, and every species of abuse, would
fill the earth, and usurp the place of the true government of the
kingdom of God.

The most remarkable and long continued instance of this kind, which
perhaps ever transpired in our world, commenced with the destruction
of the Apostles and Saints who immediately succeeded the Lord Jesus
Christ, and continued until the present century, producing in its
consequences all the human butcheries, wars, oppressions, misrule,
ignorance, superstitions, kingcraft, priestcraft, and misery, which
have visited the world in the false name of Christianity.

On the Western Hemisphere, the Apostleship, oracles, miracles, and
gifts of the Spirit, ceased from among the people in the fourth
century.

The precise time of the discontinuance of these powers on the eastern
continents, or in the Roman world, is not known. Suffice it to say,
the last of the Twelve Apostles predicted, in his vision on the Isle
of Patmos, the reign of a certain power which should make war with the
Saints, overcome them, be drunken with their blood, and hear rule over
all nations. "And by thy sorceries," said he, "were all nations
deceived." If these predictions have had their fulfilment, then it is
the height of inconsistency for any one to contend, that Rome or any
nation has perpetuated the Priesthood, Apostleship, or Church. This
would be the same as to say, the Saints were destroyed, and yet
perpetuated; all nations were deceived, and yet had the truth.

Could a universal or catholic power at once destroy the Saints, and
perpetuate them? Could the same power, at the same time, be the
conservator and promulgator of a system of universal salvation, and of
universal deception?

But leaving the prediction, and the reasoning on this subject, what
are the facts which present themselves for our own inspection, clearly
visible to all men?

Do we not find the world, for many ages, and up to the present time,
destitute of those manifestations, visions, powers, and keys of
knowledge and government, which would enlighten, purify and exalt the
race, and establish permanent righteousness and peace? In short, have
the powers of the eternal Priesthood, as described and exemplified in
the Holy Scriptures, and in this work, been manifested for the
government of the Catholic, or Protestant world, or any nation
thereof, since the destruction of the ancient Saints and Apostles?

If we answer this last question in the negative, then, we verify the
truth of the prediction by the last of the Twelve; if in the
affirmative, we deny both the truth of the prediction, and the facts
which clearly present themselves in the past history and present
circumstances of the world called "_Christian_."

When there is no longer a commissioned Priesthood perpetuated on the
earth, it becomes necessary, in order to restore the government of
God, for the man or men last holding the keys of such power, to return
to the earth as ministering angels, and to select, by the word of the
Lord, and ordain, certain individuals of the royal lineage of Israel,
to hold the keys of such Priesthood, and to ordain others, and thus
restore and re-organize the government of God, or His kingdom upon the
earth.

After the destruction of the Apostles and Saints, who succeeded Jesus
Christ, there is but one dispensation or restoration predicted by the
Prophets.

That dispensation will fulfil the times of the Gentiles, complete
their fulness, restore the kingdom to Israel, gather home their twelve
tribes, organize them into a theocratic government, that is, a
government founded and guided by Prophets, Priesthood, visions and
revelations. It will, in fact, not only restore to them the
ministration of angels, but receive its final consummation, by the
resurrection of the ancient Saints, and their return to the earth,
accompanied by the Son of God, in his own proper person. To this
dispensation, all nations must submit.

All merely human religious or political institutions, all republics,
states, kingdoms, empires, must be dissolved, the dross of ignorance
and falsehood be separated, and the golden principles of unalloyed
truth be preserved, and blended for ever in the one consolidated,
universal, eternal government of the Saints of the Most High, and all
nations shall serve and obey Him.




CHAPTER IX.

REVIVAL OR RESTORATION OF THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY IS THE PRESENT AGE.


    A modern Prophet! Yes, a mighty Seer!
    From Israel's royal line, must next appear;
    Clad in the spirit of Elijah's power,
    To prune the vineyard in th' eleventh hour;
    To light the dawn of that effulgent day,
    When King Messiah shall his sceptre sway.

The nineteenth century opened upon the world with far more favourable
auspices than any other age since the destruction of the people of the
Saints, and the reign of universal mystery. That spirit of freedom,
and independence of thought, of speech, and of action, which a few
centuries before had germinated in Europe, and which, after a stunted
growth amid the thorns and thistles of kingcraft, the tares of
priestcraft, and the weeds of superstition, in the old world,
transplanted itself, and obtained a more vigorous growth in the new
world, had now grown to a degree of maturity, and become consolidated,
opening resources for all nations, under the inestimable guarantee of
constitutional liberty.

To this standard the most enterprising, intelligent, and thinking of
every nation in Europe, had commenced to gather like a flowing stream.
Here, far separated from the practical influence, the false glare, the
empty show, or even the senseless name and titles of a self-styled or
imaginary nobility, their minds enlarged, their energies had full
scope, and their intellectual faculties, unfettered and free, and
surrounded with inexhaustible stores of unoccupied elementary riches,
soon opened and developed new channels of thought, of action, of
enterprise and improvement, the results of which have revolutionized
the world in regard to geographical knowledge, commerce,
intercommunication, transportation, travel, transmission of news, and
mutual acquaintance and interchange of thought.

The triumphs of steam over earth and sea, the extension of railroads,
and, above all, the lightning powers of the telegraph, are already,
gradually but rapidly, developing, concentrating and consolidating the
energies and interests of all nations, preparatory to the universal
development of knowledge, neighbourly kindness, and mutual
brotherhood.

Physically speaking, there seems to need but the consummation of two
great enterprises more, in order to complete the preparations
necessary for the fulfilment of Isaiah and other Prophets, in regard
to the restoration of Israel to Palestine, from the four quarters of
the earth, and the annual re-union of all nations to the new
standards, holy shrines and temples of Zion and Jerusalem, under the
auspices of that great, universal and permanent theocracy which is to
succeed the long reign of mystery.

One of these is the Great Eastern Railway from Europe to India and
China, with its branches, and accompanying telegraphic wires,
centering at Jerusalem.

The other is the Great Western Railway, with its branches and
accompanying telegraphic lines, from the Atlantic to the Pacific.

Politically speaking, some barriers yet remain to be removed, and some
conquests to be achieved, such as the subjugation of Japan, and the
triumph of constitutional liberty among certain nations where mind,
and thought, and religion are still prescribed by law.

These things achieved, even the most incredulous in regard to the
truth of Scripture Prophecy will be constrained to acknowledge, that,
physically and politically speaking, there is nothing impossible, or
even improbable, in the belief, that the twelve tribes of Israel will
be concentrated from all nations in their own land, that Jerusalem
will become the capitol of political government, the seat of
knowledge, and the shrine of worship, for the yearly resort of all the
nations and countries included in the world known to the Prophets of
old; while the Western Hemisphere, separated as it is, by two great
oceans, from the Old World, will naturally form its own central
capitol, its Zion, or New Jerusalem, to which all its tribes and
nations may perform their annual visits for instruction, devotion, and
mutual interchange of thought, of fellowship and affection.

Can the student of prophecy contemplate all these preparations,
clearly predicted thousands of years ago, and now bursting upon the
world with seemingly preconcerted connexion and exactness,
revolutionizing all things in a single age, and not be struck with the
reflection, that the hand of God must be in all this, and that moral
energy and spiritual light must be forthcoming from the heavens
commensurate with the physical and political preparations for a new
_Era_?

The same Prophets who have contemplated and described the development
of national freedom, universal intercourse, mutual peace, knowledge,
union of worship, reunion of the tribes of Israel; that have described
highways, trains of cars flying as it were with a cloud, ocean
steamers, ships, litters and swift beasts, as the instruments of
restoration, have also predicted that, in connexion with all these
preparations, a new dispensation should be manifested, a new covenant
established, "A Standard" for the nation, "An Ensign" for the people.
In short, "Swift Messengers," "Teachers," Prophets would be
commissioned, revelations be manifested, and a new organization be
developed, fitted to the times, and with principles and laws adapted
to the reorganization, order, and government of a renovated world.

Where and when should we look for the "grain of mustard seed," the
germ, the nucleus of such organization? Of course in a land of free
institutions, where such organization could be legally developed, and
claim constitutional protection, until sufficiently matured to defend
itself against the convulsions, the death struggles, the agonizing
throes, which precede the dissolution of the long reign of mystic
tyranny; and at a time when modern freedom had been consolidated,
nationalized, and its standard recognized among the nations.

Such an organization should also be looked for, in its first
development, as cotemporary with the first dawn or development of the
physical and political means provided for the same result.

The beginning of the present century gave birth to those chosen
instruments who were destined to hold the keys of restoration for the
renovation of the world.

The United States of America was the favoured nation raised up, with
institutions adapted to the protection and free development of the
necessary truths, and their practical results. And that Great Prophet,
Apostle, and Martyr--

                          JOSEPH SMITH,

was the Elias, the Restorer, the presiding Messenger, holding the keys
of the "_Dispensation of the fulness of times_."

Yes, that extraordinary man, whose innocent blood is now dripping
fresh, as it were, from the hands of assassins and their accessories,
in the United States, was the chosen vessel honoured of God, and
ordained by angels, to ordain other Apostles and Elders, to restore
the Church and kingdom of God, the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and to be
a messenger in the spirit and power of Elijah, to prepare the way of
the Lord. "For, behold, he will suddenly come to his temple!"

Like John, who filled a similar mission preparatory to the first
advent of the Son of God, he baptized with water unto repentance, for
the remission of sins; like him, he was imprisoned; and like him, his
life was taken from the earth; and finally, like all other true
messengers, his message is being demonstrated by its progressive
fulfilment--the powers, gifts, and signs following the administration
of his message in all the world, and every minute particular of his
predictions fulfilling in the order of events, as the wheels of time
bring them due.

But in one important point his message differs from all former
messages. The science of Theology revived by him will never decline,
nor its keys be taken from the earth. They are committed to man for
the last time. Their consummation will restore the tribes of Israel
and Judah; overthrow all corrupt institutions; usher in the reign of
universal peace and knowledge; introduce to the earth her lawful and
eternal King, the crucified Nazarene, the resurrected Messiah; banish
darkness and death, sorrow, mourning and tears, from the face of our
globe; and crown our race with the laurels of victory and eternal
life.

Ages yet unborn will rise up and call him blessed. A thousand
generations of countless myriads will laud his praise and recount his
deeds, while unnumbered nations bask in the light and enjoy the
benefits of the institution founded by his instrumentality.

His kindred, the nation that gave him birth, and exulted at his death,
nay, his very murderers and their posterity, will yet come bending
unto him, and seek his forgiveness, and the benefits of his labours.

But, Oh! the pain! the dark despair! the torments of a guilty
conscience! the blackness of darkness, in the lower hell, which the
guilty wretches will experience before that happy day of deliverance!

Oh! the countless myriads of the offspring of innocent and honourable
men who will walk the earth, tread on the ashes, or plow and reap over
the bones and dust of those miserable murderers and their accomplices
who have consented to the shedding of innocent blood! ere the final
trump shall sound, which calls up their sleeping dust from its long
slumbers in the tomb, and their spirits from the prison of the damned.

And even when this, to them almost interminable, period has rolled
away, and they rise from the dead, instead of a welcome exaltation to
the presence and society of the sons of God, an eternal banishment
awaits them. They never can come where God and Christ dwell, but will
be servants in the dominions of the Saints, their former victims.

This extraordinary personage was born in Sharon, Windsor County,
Vermont, United States, December 23rd, 1805.

He removed with his father, during childhood, and settled near
Palmyra, in Wayne County, New York. Amid these forest wilds he was
reared a farmer, and inured to all the hardships, toils, and
privations of a newly settled country. His education was therefore
very limited. When about seventeen years of age, he had several open
visions, in which a holy angel ministered to him, admonished him for
his sins, taught him repentance, and faith in the crucified and risen
Messiah, opened to him the Scriptures of the Prophets, unfolding the
field of prophecy pertaining to the latter-day glory, and the
doctrines of Christ and his ancient Apostles.

On the 22nd Sept., 1827, the angel directed him to a hill a few miles
distant, called anciently Cumorah. Around this hill, in the fifth
century of the Christian era, had rallied the last remnant of a once
powerful and highly polished nation called the Nephites.

Here, two hundred and thirty thousand men, women and children,
marshalled themselves for a last defence, in legions of ten thousand
each, under their respective commanders, at whose head was the
renowned Mormon, the General of a hundred battles. And here they
received the enemy in untold numbers, and melted away before them,
till none remained except a few that fled to the southward, and a few
that fell wounded, and were left by the enemy among the unburied dead.

Among these latter were General Mormon, and his son, and second in
command--General Moroni.

These were the last Prophets of a nation, now no more. They held the
sacred records, compiled and transmitted from their fathers, from the
remotest antiquity. They held the Urim and Thummim, and the compass of
Lehi, which had been prepared by Providence, to guide a colony from
Jerusalem to America.

In the hill Cumorah, they deposited all these things. Here they lay
concealed for fourteen hundred years. And here did the angel Moroni
direct the young Joseph to behold these sacred things, in their sacred
deposit, and to receive, from these long-silent and gloomy archives,
an abridged record of the whole, and with it the Urim and Thummim.

The abridged record, thus obtained, was engraved in Egyptian
characters, on gold plates, by the hands of the two Prophets and
Generals--Mormon and Moroni. By the instructions of the angel, and the
use of the Urim and Thummim, the youthful Joseph, now a Prophet and
Seer, was enabled to translate the abridgment, or rather the unsealed
portion which was destined for the present age.

This done, the angel of the Lord appeared to three other persons,
called Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer; showed them
the golden plates, and the engravings thereon; bore testimony of their
correct translation by the Prophet Joseph, and commanded them to bear
a faithful testimony of the same. Two of these were respectable
farmers, and the other was a school-master.

Early in 1830, this translation with the accompanying testimony, was
published in English, in the United States, under the title of the
Book Of Mormon.

It is now, 1853, translated and published in nearly all European
languages.

This book more deeply interests the world, and every intelligent,
accountable being therein, than any other book, save the Jewish
Scriptures, which is now extant. Its history penetrates the otherwise
dark oblivion of the past, as it regards America, through the remote
ages of antiquity; follows up the stream of the generations of man,
till arriving at the great fountain, the distributor of nations,
tribes and tongues--the Tower of Babel, it ceases, or is lost in, and
sweetly blended with, that one great undivided Adamic river, whose
source is in Paradise, the cradle of man; whose springs issue from
beneath the throne of the Eternal; and whose secret fountains comprise
the infinite expanse, the boundless ocean of intellect, fact, and
historic truth, as recorded in the archives of eternity. Its prophetic
vision opens the events of unborn time. The fate of nations; the
restoration of Judah and Israel; the downfall of corrupt churches and
institutions; the end of superstition and misrule; the universal
prevalence of peace, truth, light and knowledge; the awful wars which
precede those happy times; the glorious coming of Jesus Christ as
King; the resurrection of the Saints, to reign upon the earth; the
great, grand rest of a thousand years; the jubilee of universal nature
upon our planet, are all predicted in that book. The time and means of
their fulfilment are pointed out with clearness, showing the present
age more pregnant with events than all the ages of Adam's race which
have gone before it. Its doctrines are developed in such plainness and
simplicity, and with such clearness and precision, that no man can
mistake them. They are there as they flowed from the mouth of a risen
Redeemer, in the liquid eloquence of love, mingled with immortal tears
of joy and compassion, and were written by men whose tears of
overwhelming affection and gratitude bathed his immortal feet.

It was ascertained by revelation, by means of the Urim and
Thummim, that the youthful Prophet Joseph was of the house of Israel,
of the tribe of Joseph.

He continued to receive visions, revelations, and the ministry of
angels, by whom he was at length ordained to the Apostleship, or High
Priesthood after the order of Melchizedec, to hold the keys of the
kingdom of God, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Thus qualified, he proceeded, on the 6th of April, A.D. 1830, to
organize the Church of the Saints, which then consisted of six
members. The gifts of healing, of prophecy, of visions and miracles,
began to be manifested among the believers, thus confirming his
testimony with signs following.

In this same year, the principles restored by him were proclaimed, and
Branches of the Church were organized in various parts of his own
State, in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and elsewhere; and the number of his
disciples increased from six members, to upwards of one thousand.

During the three following years, hundreds of ministers, ordained by
him, were sent out in all directions through the country, and Branches
of the Church were organized in most of the States of the American
Union.

In eighteen hundred and thirty five, he ordained by commandment of the
Lord, a quorum of Twelve Apostles, and several quorums of seventy, as
a traveling ministry.

In 'thirty-six, a temple was completed and dedicated, in Kirtland,
Ohio; in which these quorums, and the Priesthood in general were
assembled in a school of the Prophets, and were instructed, and
anointed to their holy calling. In this same year, some of the
Apostles visited Upper Canada, and spread the fulness of the Gospel in
Toronto and all the region round, gathering several Branches of the
Church.

In 'thirty-seven, a mission was sent to England, which was attended
with the same powers, and with remarkable success.

In 'thirty-eight, the State of Missouri undertook the extermination of
the Church from its borders, murdered many men, women and children,
and finally succeeded in the forcible expulsion of about ten thousand
people, and the seizure of their lands and property.

In eighteen hundred and forty, the quorum of the Twelve Apostles
visited England, gathered great numbers into the Church, and published
the Book of Mormon, and several other works, among which was a
periodical called the _Millennial Star_, which now, in 1853, has a
circulation of nearly eighteen thousand copies weekly.

Between the years 'forty, and 'forty-four, our youthful Prophet
gathered about him many thousands of his disciples; erected the great
city of Nauvoo, on the banks of the Mississippi; commenced the
erection of one of the most splendid temples in the world; and
organized a legion of citizen soldiers for its defence. This legion
comprised nearly six thousand men, and was commanded by the young
Prophet Joseph, who held a government commission, as
Lieutenant-General.

From this centre of science and heavenly light, there emanated rays,
by the aid of a foreign ministry, penetrating afar, and lighting up
the dawn of that effulgent day which is destined to break over all the
earth, and shine for ever.

Apostles, High Priests, Elders, Counsellors and Ministers of every
degree, here thronged our youthful Prophet and hero, and were taught
in this great school of Theology and spiritual philosophy; while a
hundred thousand disciples in the nation and beyond the seas, looked
to this centre for light and instruction.

Such was the progress of the science of Theology, revived in the
present age; such the result of fourteen years of the ministry of an
unlettered youth, crying in the wilderness the proclamation of
repentance, baptizing for the remission of sins, and holding the keys
of this divine, eternal power.

His unparalleled success, and still increasing influence, now alarmed
his former persecutors, and raised their jealousy and envy to the
highest pitch of frenzy and madness.

Several counties of Illinois combined with the former enemies, who had
robbed and destroyed the Saints in Missouri, and, calling public
meetings, passed resolutions to destroy the city of Nauvoo, and to
force the Saints, once more, to abandon their homes and farms to the
possession of the land pirates. They also entered into covenant, to
take the life of the young Joseph.

To resist this overwhelming storm, our hero and Prophet marshalled his
legion of six thousand men, in his beloved city of Nauvoo, prepared
for the most vigorous defence, and awaited the onset. The cowardly
enemy soon discovered the impropriety of an open attack, and resolved
on stratagem. They caused a magistrate of their own number to issue a
writ; and sent a constable to bring the person of Joseph into the
midst of those who had sworn to kill him. To yield to this mockery
would be to lose his life. To resist it would be construed into
treason and would bring on him the whole forces of the State. This
stratagem succeeded--Nauvoo, its legion and its general, were declared
in rebellion. His Excellency, Thomas Ford, Governor of the State of
Illinois, mustered an army, marched to the scene of conflict, took
sides with the enemy, and in fact incorporated their entire forces
with his own troops.

With this formidable force he marched to Carthage, a small town
eighteen miles from Nauvoo. He then sent a captain, named Singleton,
to take command of the Nauvoo legion, and demanded its
Lieutenant-General to repair to Carthage, and place himself in the
hands of those who had publicly combined to take his life. Sooner than
have submitted to these insults and humiliating demands, the legion
would have joyfully marched to Carthage, and cut to pieces this
cowardly band of rebels against American institutions and all the
rights of man.

But the Saints were located between two powerful States, who were now
combined against the laws, constitutions and liberties of their
country. To destroy one army, or even resist its most extravagant
demands, would be to draw upon themselves and families, the
overwhelming forces of the ferocious, ignorant, and worse than savage
beings, who had long thirsted for their plunder and their blood.

The young Prophet had no confidence in the Governor's pledge to
protect his person. He felt the hour had come, when his own blood
alone could appease the enemy, and preserve the lives of his flock. He
restrained the ardour of the legion; called upon them, by the love
they had ever borne to him as a Prophet and Apostle; and conjured
them, by the respect and confidence they had shown him as their
General, to submit to the extravagant demands of his Excellency, and
leave the event with God. He now took an affectionate leave of his
beloved legion, who were dissolved in tears; tore himself from the
embraces of his aged and widowed mother, and frantic wife and
children, and repaired to Carthage. He was accompanied by his brother
Hyrum, and the two of the Twelve, that were not abroad on foreign
missions, who would not forsake him. On the way he was cheerful but
solemn. He spoke little, but observed to those about him, _"I am going
like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I
have a conscience void of offence towards God, and towards all men. I
shall die innocent: and it shall yet be said of me--He was murdered in
cold blood_."

Arriving at Carthage, he delivered himself to his enemies; answered to
the charge in the original writ, to enforce which all the Governor's
forces had been mustered, and was then committed to prison to answer
the charge of treason.

In this dungeon he was still accompanied by the two Apostles and his
brother Hyrum, who were determined to die with him.

Here as the four friends sat in the upper room, singing hymns, on the
afternoon of the 27th day of June, 1844, the prison was suddenly
surrounded with demons in the flesh, armed with muskets and bayonets,
and their faces as black as Cain--the original murderer. These
commenced firing through the doors and windows of the prison, while a
portion assaulted and broke open the door. Hyrum suddenly fell, and
died without a groan, being pierced with four balls. Taylor fled,
wounded and bleeding, to the window, and was about to throw himself
out, when a ball aimed at his heart, hit his watch in his vest pocket,
and threw him back into the room. The other Apostle, Willard Richards,
stood and parried the guns with his hand staff, receiving slight
injury.

In the midst of all this scene, the Prophet's presence of mind did not
forsake him. He saw his brother Hyrum fall, stiffen and die. He then
exclaimed, in the anguish of his soul--"O my brother!" and sprang for
the window, amid showers of ball as thick as hail. He instantly threw
himself from the upper story into the midst of the bristling bayonets
of the enemy, and, on alighting, was pierced with a shower of balls,
and instantly died without a struggle or a groan.

His presence of mind, and prompt action, in thus throwing himself
among the enemy, drew them from the prison in time to save the lives
of the two Apostles, which was, no doubt, the object of this, the last
glorious act of his life.

Thus ended the mortal career of a youth who had revealed the ancient
history of a continent; restored to man the keys and powers of the
divine science of Theology; organized the Church and kingdom of God,
and revealed, and re-established those principles, which will
eventually prevail, and govern the sons of earth, in countless ages
yet unborn. "The good shepherd," said Jesus, "layeth down his life for
the sheep."

When the news of this horrid tragedy spread abroad, the fear of
vengeance from the Nauvoo legion seized the Governor, his troops, and
the whole gang of pirates; all fled, and even the inhabitants of the
guilty villages in the vicinity, vacated their habitations, and fled
in terror and dismay.

As the news reached Nauvoo, a thrill of horror and of anguish
unutterable ran, as with electricity, through every pulse. The legion
sprang to arms, and would have desolated the whole rebel counties, now
left unprotected, had not their judgments balanced the burning
attribute of justice which swelled their bosoms.

As it was, they smothered their resentment, and prepared for the
burial of the illustrious dead. The bodies of the two martyrs were
borne to the city; being met by the entire populace, bowed with
sorrow, bathed in tears, and their bosoms upheaved with a sense of
sorrow and outraged humanity, such as, perhaps, an entire populace at
once never felt, since man was doomed to mourn.

The Twelve, who were abroad, soon returned, soothed and comforted the
sheep, and exhorted them to union and perseverance. The work on the
temple was resumed, and finally completed, at an expense of many
hundred thousand dollars. In this holy edifice, after its dedication
to the Lord, a portion of the Priesthood received those holy washings,
anointings, keys, ordinances, oracles and instructions, which were yet
wanting to perfect them in the fulness of the Priesthood.

In the autumn of 1845, the enemy again rallied, and commenced to
desolate the borders of the Nauvoo settlements by fire and sword.

Wearied with long continued vexation and persecution, the council of
the Apostles now determined to seek peace for the Saints, amid the
far-off and almost unexplored deserts and mountains of the interior.
In February, 1846, this emigration was commenced, headed by the
Apostles and their families.

On the 24th of July, 1847, the first pioneers of this vast emigration,
headed by the President of the whole Church, Brigham Young, entered
the Valley of Great Salt Lake.

In the meantime, the beautiful Nauvoo, and its surrounding farms and
villas fell a prey to the enemy, after a vigorous defence. Its temple,
the pride and glory of America, was laid in ashes. Its last remnant
plundered, robbed of their all, sick, destitute, wounded, bleeding,
dying, at length disappeared beyond the horizon of the illimitable
plains of the west, and, for a moment, the curtain of oblivion closed
over this strange drama, and the kingdom of God seemed lost to mortal
view.

Again it rises, and what do we behold!

The banner of freedom unfurled a thousand miles from the frontiers of
the persecuting foe; its waving folds, amid the snow-clad peaks of the
Rocky mountains, inviting to liberty and light, the oppressed of every
clime; and a free and sovereign State rising, in majesty and smiling
splendour, amid the fastnesses of nature's eternal ramparts; while the
exhaustless treasures of the golden mountains of California, revealed
by the providence-guiding keys of modern Theology, are poured like a
flowing stream into the treasury of the Lord, to aid in the gathering
and subsistence of the Saints.

Can the student of Theology contemplate all these grand events and
their results, all verging to one focus, all combining to prepare the
way for the consummation of the entire volume of unfulfilled prophecy,
and still be so much at a loss as to query, like one of old, "Art thou
he that should come; or, look we for another?" If so, we can only
recommend, to one so slow of heart, to search the Scriptures, and all
good books extant on the subject. And, while he searches, let him turn
from his sins, and live in newness of life, and call upon God, the
Father of all, in the name of Messiah, that his understanding may be
enlightened, and his stubborn heart subdued, and constrained to yield
to the force of Truth.




CHAPTER X.

KEYS OF INITIATION IN PRACTICAL THEOLOGY.


    Is't possible! A sinful man like me,
    A candidate for heaven's mystery!
    May I approach the gate and enter in,
    Be wash'd and cleans'd from all my former sin,
    Renew'd in spirit, and partake the power
    Of bless'd Theology from this good hour.

The student of this deeply interesting science, who has traced, with
us, the thrilling incidents of its history on earth, till he finds it
restored in all its beauties, and its powers taking root in the earth,
to bear eternal fruit, will, doubtless, feel a desire to be instructed
in the first principles--the ordinances or means by which he may
personally partake of its benefits, and exercise its gifts.

There are certain qualifications, or personal preparations
indispensably necessary, without which, no person can be a proper
candidate for blessings so divine.

First. He must believe in Jesus Christ, and in the testimony of the
Apostle, or commissioned officer, to whom he looks for the
administration of these blessings.

Secondly. He must forsake a sinful course of life; must deny himself
of every impure or unlawful indulgence; must do right with his fellow
creatures, and determine to keep the commandments of Jesus Christ.

With these qualifications he comes to the Apostle, Elder, or Priest of
the Church of the Saints, who, after a covenant on the part of the
candidate to forsake his sins, and keep the commandments of Jesus
Christ, goes down into the water with him, and there buries him, in
the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, for remission of sins,
and then raises him from his watery grave.

This ordinance is to represent the death, burial and resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and is called Baptism.

Having passed through this ordinance, the hands of some one, or more,
of the authorised Priesthood, are next laid upon the head of the
candidate, in the same sacred names, and the gift of the Holy Spirit
is confirmed upon him. This baptism of water and of the Spirit is
called a new birth; and it is in reality a repetition of the natural
birth, or entrance into the elements of a new existence.

To realise this, the student must be indoctrinated in the philosophy
of his natural birth, which involves three principles; viz.--"_The
spirit, the water and the blood_."

The embryo formation of the human body, is commenced and sustained by
blood and spirit, in the womb of nature, where, until the period of
birth, it floats in the element of water. At birth, then, it is
literally born of water, that is, it emerges from that element in
which it has been so long immersed, into a different element, called
the atmosphere, which then becomes a necessary element of existence.

To be born again, then, is to enter into the same element, suspend the
breath in the watery womb, and emerge from that element into the
atmosphere, and again gasp the first breath in the new creation;
while, at the same time, the blood of Atonement is applied to the
individual, for remission of sins, and is followed by the outpouring
of the Holy Spirit of promise. As it is written--"_There are three
that bear record on the earth; the spirit, the water, and the blood_."

The things of this visible creation, are the patterns of things in the
invisible world; and are so arranged as to exactly correspond--the one
answering to the other, as face to face in a mirror.

The immersion in water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, for remission of sins; and the baptism of the Holy Spirit,
which follows according to promise, by the laying on of the hands of
the holy Priesthood; were instituted from before the foundation of the
world, as a pattern of the birth, death, resurrection and new life of
man.

The candidate is now initiated into the first principles of the
science of Divine Theology. His mind is quickened, his intellectual
faculties are aroused to intense activity. He is, as it were,
illuminated. He learns more of divine truth in a few days, than he
could have learned in a life time in the best merely human
institutions in the world.

His affections are also purified, exalted, and increased in
proportion. He loves his heavenly Father, and Jesus Christ, with a
perfect love. He also loves the members of the Church, or the body of
Christ, as he loves his own soul; while his bosom swells with the
tenderest sympathies, and emotions of good will and benevolence, for
all mankind. He would make any sacrifice which might be expedient, to
do good. He would lay down his life most cheerfully, without one
moment's hesitation, or regret, if required of him by the cause of
truth.

He also feels the spirit of prayer and watchfulness continually, and
pours out his soul in the same, and finds he is answered in all things
which are expedient. He is now in a fit capacity to exercise some one
or more of the spiritual gifts.

He may perhaps speak in power, in the word of wisdom, in the word of
knowledge, in prophecy, or in other tongues. He may see a vision,
dream an inspired dream, or possess the gift to be healed, or to heal
others, by the laying on of hands in the name of Jesus Christ.

To impart a portion of the Holy Spirit by the touch, or by the laying
on of hands; or to impart a portion of the element of life, from one
animal body to another, by an authorized agent who acts in the name of
God, and who is filled therewith, is as much in accordance with the
laws of nature, as for water to seek its own level; air, its
equilibrium; or heat, and electricity, their own mediums of
conveyance.

This law of spiritual fluid, its communicative properties, and the
channel by which it is imparted from one person to another, bear some
resemblance, or analogy, to the laws and operations of electricity.
Like electricity, it is imparted by the contact of two bodies, through
the channel of the nerves.

But the two fluids differ very widely. The one is a property nearly
allied to the grosser elements of matter; not extensively endowed with
the attributes of intelligence, wisdom, affection, or moral
discrimination. It can therefore be imparted from one animal body to
another, irrespective of the intellectual or moral qualities of the
subject or recipient. The other is a substance endowed with the
attributes of intelligence, affection, moral discrimination, love,
charity, and benevolence pure as the emotions which swell the bosom,
thrill the nerves, or vibrate the pulse of the Father of all.

An agent filled with this heavenly fluid cannot impart of the same to
another, unless that other is justified, washed, cleansed from all his
impurities of heart, affections, habits or practices, by the blood of
atonement, which is generally applied in connexion with the baptism of
remission.

A man who continues in his sins, and who has no living faith in the
Son of God, cannot receive the gift of the Holy Spirit through the
ministration of any agent, however holy he may be. The impure spirit
of such a one will repulse the pure element, upon the natural laws of
sympathetic affinity, or of attraction and repulsion.

An intelligent being, in the image of God, possesses every organ,
attribute, sense, sympathy, affection, of will, wisdom, love, power
and gift, which is possessed by God Himself.

But these are possessed by man, in his rudimental state, in a
subordinate sense of the word. Or, in other words, these attributes
are in embryo; and are to be gradually developed. They resemble a
bud--a germ, which gradually developes into bloom, and then, by
progress, produces the mature fruit, after its own kind.

The gift of the Holy Spirit adapts itself to all these organs or
attributes. It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases,
enlarges, expands and purifies all the natural passions and
affections; and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful
use. It inspires, developes, cultivates and matures all the fine toned
sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings and affections of our
nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness
and charity. It developes beauty of person, form and features. It
tends to health, vigour, animation and social feeling. It developes
and invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual
man. It strengthens, invigorates, and gives tone to the nerves. In
short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light
to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being.

In the presence of such persons, one feels to enjoy the light of their
countenances, as the genial rays of a sunbeam. Their very atmosphere
diffuses a thrill, a warm glow of pure gladness and sympathy, to the
heart and nerves of others who have kindred feelings, er sympathy of
spirit. No matter if the parties are strangers, entirely unknown to
each other in person or character; no matter if they have never spoken
to each other, each will be apt to remark in his own mind, and perhaps
exclaim, when referring to the interview--"O what an atmosphere
encircles that stranger! How my heart thrilled with pure and holy
feelings in his presence! What confidence and sympathy he inspired!
His countenance and spirit gave me more assurance, than a thousand
written recommendations, or introductory letters." Such is the gift of
the Holy Spirit, and such are its operations, when received through
the lawful channel--the divine, eternal Priesthood.




CHAPTER XI.

PHILOSOPHY OF MIRACLES.


    Trembling with awe and fear, the mind inquires--
    "What master spirit, now, the bard inspires;
    What bold philosophy shall dare assign
    A law to govern miracles divine--
    Tell how effects transpire without a cause,
    And how kind nature breaks kind nature's laws?"

Among the popular errors of modern times, an opinion prevails that
miracles are events which transpire contrary to the laws of nature,
that they are effects without a cause.

If such is the fact, then, there never has been a miracle, and there
never will be one. The laws of nature are the laws of _truth_. Truth
is unchangeable, and independent in its own sphere. A law of nature
never has been broken. And it is an absolute impossibility that such
law ever should be broken.

That which, at first sight, appears to be contrary to the known laws
of nature, will always be found, on investigation, to be in perfect
accordance with those laws. For instance, had a sailor of the last
century been running before the wind, and met with a vessel running at
a good rate of speed, directly in opposition to the wind and current,
this sight would have presented, to his understanding, a miracle in
the highest possible sense of the term, that is, an event entirely
contrary to the laws of nature, as known to him. Or if a train of
cars, loaded with hundreds of passengers, or scores of tons of
freight, had been seen passing over the surface of the earth, at the
rate of sixty miles per hour, and propelled, seemingly, by its own
inherent powers of locomotion, our fathers would have beheld a
miracle--an event which would have appeared, to them, to break those
very laws of nature with which they were the most familiar.

If the last generation had witnessed the conveyance of news from
London to Paris, in an instant, while they knew nothing of the late
invention of the electric telegraph, they would have testified, in all
candour, and with the utmost assurance, that a miracle had been
performed, in open violation of the well known laws of nature, and
contrary to all human knowledge of cause and effect.

But, once familiar with the arts of the living age, all those miracles
cease to be such, and the laws of nature, and of cause and effect, are
found to be still moving, unimpaired, in all the harmony of primeval
existence and operation.

The same views will apply, with equal force, to all the spiritual
phenomena of the universe.

The terms _miracle_ and _mystery_ must become obsolete, and finally
disappear from the vocabulary of intelligences, as they advance in the
higher spheres of intellectual consistency. Even now they should be
used only in a relative or limited sense, as applicable to those
things which are not yet within reach of our powers, or means of
comprehension.

We will here remind the student of two principles, or laws of
existence, developed in a former chapter of this work, which will
account for all the miraculous powers of the universe--all the mighty
works ever manifested by God, or by His servants.

First. All the elements of the material universe are eternal.

Second. There is a divine substance, fluid or essence, called Spirit,
widely diffused among these eternal elements.

This spiritual substance is the most refined, subtle, and powerful
element in the universe. It is endowed with all wisdom, all knowledge,
all intelligence and power. In short, it is the light, life, power and
principle of all things, by which they move; and of all intelligences,
by which they think.

This divine element, or Spirit, is the immediate, active, or
controlling agent, in all holy, miraculous powers.

Angels, and all holy men, perform all their miracles, simply, to use a
modern magnetic term, by being in "_communication_" with this divine
substance. Two beings, or two millions--any number thus placed in
"_communication_"--all possess one mind. The mind of the one is the
mind of the other, the will of the one is the will of the other, the
word of the one is the word of the other. And the holy fluid, or
Spirit, being in communication with them all, goes forth to control
the elements, and to execute all their mandates which are legally
issued, and in accordance with the mind and wisdom of the Great
Eloheim.

God the Father is the Head. The mandates of Jesus Christ must be in
the name of the Father.

The mandates of angels, or of holy men, in order to be legal, or of
due force and power, must be issued in the name of Jesus Christ, or of
the three who compose the Head Council; and must be in accordance with
their united mind and will. The Holy Spirit then goes forth and
executes their mandates. This agency being _invisible_, and the effect
_visible_, the act performed appears to those who are unacquainted
with spiritual agency, as a miracle, or an _effect_ without a _cause_.

When Jesus Christ was clothed upon with a mortal tabernacle, he had
not the fulness of this divine substance at the first, but grew and
increased in the same, till, being raised from the dead, he received a
fulness and, therefore, had all power, in heaven and on earth.

His Apostles received a portion of this Spirit, but not a fulness,
while they were mortal; therefore, they could know and perform some
things, but not all.

The members of the Church also partook of this Spirit, through the
ministry of the Apostles, by which miraculous gifts were imparted unto
them, some to one, and some to another: some to speak in tongues; some
to interpret, or translate from one language into another; some to
prophesy, see visions, or converse with angels; and others to control,
or cast out devils, or heal the sick; and others, again, to teach and
edify the Church, or the world, by the word of wisdom, and by the word
of knowledge.

All these gifts and miracles were the workings of that one, and the
self same Spirit given to the members of the Church of the Saints,
while the world did not partake of a sufficient measure of the Spirit
to possess these gifts. The reason of this is, that they did not
repent, and believe in Jesus Christ, and be baptized in his name, and
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, by the laying on of the hands of
the Priesthood--these duties and ordinances, being the legal or
appointed channel by which the gift of the Holy Spirit was imparted.
The reason why these gifts of the Spirit have not been enjoyed in all
ages of the so called "_Christian Church_" is because it is not the
true Church; nor, is the true ministry or Apostleship to be found
among the Church, or Churches, where these gifts are denied. Every
minister and member of such institutions have need to repent, and be
baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins; and to
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, by the laying on of hands of
those who have authority, in order to enter into the kingdom of God.

These ordinances, ministered by a legal Priesthood, being divinely
appointed, are the only legitimate means by which man may receive and
exercise these divine powers; or, in other words, they are the means
ordained of God, by which one being may communicate or impart a
portion of this divine substance to another, so as to place that other
in communication with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and with
angels, and the spirits of just men in the world of spirits, and with
the members of the true Church on the earth.

To heal a person by the touch, or by the laying on of hands in the
name of Jesus Christ, or to impart the Holy Spirit by the laying on of
hands, is as much in accordance with the laws of nature, as for water
to seek its own level, an apple to fall to the ground when loosened
from the tree where it grew, quicksilver to attract its own
affinities, or the magnet to obey its own laws.

As the electric fluid obeys its own laws upon the wire, so, also, does
the spiritual or holy fluid convey itself, through certain channels,
from one body to another, in accordance with certain legitimate laws.

The usual channel for all spiritual fluids, whether holy or impure, in
their operations upon the human system, or in their passage from one
animal body to another, is the nerves.

A person commissioned of Jesus Christ, and filled with this spiritual
substance, can impart of the same to another, provided there is a
preparation of heart, and faith on the part of the receiver. Or if, as
in cases of healing, casting out devils, &c., it happens that the
receiver has no command of his own mind--as in cases of little
children, persons swooned, fainted, deranged, or dead, then the faith
of the administrator alone, or in connexion with other friends and
agents, in his behalf, is sufficient, in many cases, to perform the
work.

However, the touch, or laying on of hands, is not the only means of
communicating the gift of healing. A word spoken, a mandate issued, or
even a handkerchief, apron, or other garment, worn or touched by a
person full of this Spirit, and conveyed to another, has, according to
sacred history, and also the experience of the present age, proved
sufficient to communicate the spiritual fluid, between minds of strong
and mutual faith. So well acquainted was the Prophet Elisha with this
principle, that he sent his servant to lay his staff upon a dead
child, in order to raise it from the dead; but, in this instance, the
undertaking failed. The Prophet could only resuscitate the child by
placing face on face, eye to eye, mouth to mouth, hand to hand, &c.,
so as to give the greatest possible effect to the imparting of the
spirit of life.

For the holy and divine fluid, or spiritual element, to control all
other elements, agreeable to its own will, and the will of others, who
are in communication or in perfect unison with itself, is just as
natural as for the greater to control the less, or the strong the
weak. It is upon the same principle that a higher intelligence is able
to comprehend, circumscribe, and instruct that which is less.

Hence, when the worlds were framed, God spake, and this divine fluid
went forth and executed the mandate, by controlling the elements, in
accordance with the will, pattern, or design, formed in the mind of
Him that spake, and it that executed. Wisdom pondered the pattern of
all created things, weighed their properties, attributes and uses in
the balance of mature intellect. Every minute portion and member of
the several departments of life and being, every adaptation to their
natural use, was clearly conceived, formed in the mind, and matured,
ere the mandate was issued. And the whole was executed in exact
accordance with the pattern matured in the Divine Mind.

By this divine Spirit all things were designed and formed. By this
divine Substance all things live, move, and have a being. By this
agency Moses controlled the sea; Joshua, the motions of the earth;
Daniel, the mouths of the lions; and his brethren, the flames. By
this, the heavens were opened, and were shut; the rain or the dearth
prevailed; armies were subdued; the sick healed, or the dead raised;
and all in accordance with the laws of nature, it being perfectly
natural for the subordinate elements to obey the supreme, all
controlling, all pervading element, which contains in itself the
innate, and inalienable, controlling power.

The modern world, called "_Christian_" claims to have perpetuated the
system called "Christianity," while, at the same time, it declares,
that the miraculous gifts of the Spirit have ceased.

With as much propriety it might be contended, that the magnet had been
perpetuated, but had lost its magnetic properties; that water was
perpetuated with all its virtues, but had lost its power to quench
thirst, or seek its own level; that fire was still fire, but had lost
its heat.

How, we inquire, can Christianity have been perpetuated, while its
virtues, its legitimate powers, its distinguishing features, its very
life and essence have ceased from among men? Or, of what possible use
is it if it does exist? Is a compass of use when its needle has lost
its magnetic attraction? Is water of use when it no longer seeks its
level, or quenches thirst? Is fire of use when it loses its heat? Is a
sun dial of use in a dark and cloudy day; or, a watch without a
mainspring?

Or, are the mere forms and ceremonies of any system of use, when the
divine, or legitimate powers, for which such forms were instituted,
are withdrawn?

O man! be no longer deceived by solemn mockeries of things sacred, or
by great and holy names applied to corrupt and degenerate systems.

When the miracles and gifts of the divine Spirit ceased from among
men, Christianity ceased, the Christian ministry ceased, the Church of
Christ ceased.

That ministry which sets aside modern inspiration, revelation,
prophecy, angels, visions, healings, &c., is not ordained of God; but
is Anti-Christian in spirit. In short, it is that spirit of
priestcraft and kingcraft, by which the world, for many ages, has been
ruled as with a rod of iron.

The sooner the present generation lose all reverence and respect for
modern "_Christianity_," with all its powerless forms and solemn
mockeries, the sooner they will be prepared to receive the kingdom of
God. The sooner the treasuries of nations, and the purses of
individuals, are relieved from the support of priestcraft and
superstitions, so much sooner will they be able and willing to devote
their means and influence to print and publish the glad tidings of the
fulness of the Gospel, restored in this age, to assist in the
gathering of the house of Israel, and in the building of the cities
and temples of Zion and Jerusalem.




CHAPTER XII.

ANGELS AND SPIRITS.


    Boast not your lightning wires to bear the news,
    Such tardy means the Saints would never choose;
    Too slow your fluid, and too short your wires
    For heavenly converse, such as love inspires.
    If man would fain commune with worlds above,
    Angels transport the news on wings of love.

    "_Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
    them who shall be heirs of salvation?_" Heb. i. 14.

Angels are of the same race as men. They are, in fact, men who have
passed from the rudimental state to the higher spheres of progressive
being. They have died and risen again to life, and are consequently
possessed of a divine, human body of flesh and bones, immortal and
eternal. They eat, drink, sing and converse like other men. Some of
them hold the keys of Apostleship and Priesthood, by which they teach,
instruct, bless, and perform miracles and many mighty works.
Translated men, like Enoch, Elijah, John the Apostle, and three of the
Apostles of the Western Hemisphere, are also like the angels.

Angels are ministers, both to men upon the earth, and to the world of
spirits. They pass from one world to another with more ease, and in
less time than we pass from one city to another. They have not a
single attribute which man has not. But their attributes are more
matured, or more developed, than the attributes of men in this present
sphere of existence.

Whenever the keys of Priesthood, or, in other words, the keys of the
science of Theology, are enjoyed by man on the earth, the people thus
privileged, are entitled to the ministering of angels, whose business
with men on the earth, is to restore the keys of the Apostleship, when
lost; to ordain men to the Apostleship, when there has been no
Apostolic succession; to commit the keys of a new dispensation; to
reveal the mysteries of history; the facts of present or past times;
and to unfold the events of a future time. They are, sometimes,
commissioned also to execute judgments upon individuals, cities or
nations. They can be present in their glory, or, they can come in the
form and appearance of other men. They can also be present without
being visible to mortals.

When they come as other men, they will perhaps eat and drink, and wash
their feet; and lodge with their friends. Hence, it is written--"_Be
not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have
entertained angels unawares_."

Their business is, also, to comfort and instruct individual members of
the Church of the Saints; to heal them by the laying on of hands in
the name of Jesus Christ, or to tell them what means to use in order
to get well; to teach them good things, to sing them a good song, to
warn them of approaching danger, or, to deliver them from prison, or
from death.

These blessings have always been enjoyed by the people, or Church of
the Saints, whenever such Church has existed on our planet. They are
not peculiar to one dispensation more than another.

They were busy in the Patriarchal dispensation, in the Mosaic, and in
the Gospel dispensations. They delivered Lot and destroyed Sodom.

They were busy with Moses and the Prophets. They foretold to Zechariah
the birth of John. They predicted to Mary her conception, and the
birth of Jesus Christ. They informed Joseph, her husband, of her
situation. They announced the birth of Jesus to the shepherds of
Judea, and sang an anthem of peace on earth and good will to man, to
hail him welcome. They attended on his footsteps, in all his sojourn
on the earth. In fact, an angel was the instrument to open the gloomy
prison of the sepulchre, and to call forth the sleeping body of the
Messiah, the first to exclaim, "He is not here, but is risen." Two
angels in white raiment, were the first to announce his second advent,
while he ascended up in the presence of his disciples. Thus, being
delivered from the personal attendance on their Master on the earth,
they turned their attention to the Apostles, opened the way for their
ministry among Jew and Gentile, delivering them from prison and from
danger, and revealing the mysteries which God saw fit to make known to
the Saints of that age. And when all the other Apostles had fallen
asleep, and the Apostle John had been banished, to dig in the coal
mines of the lone isle of Patmos, they still were faithful to their
charge. They followed him there, and there unfolded to him the events
of all ages and generations.

The darkness of the middle ages; the corruptions of Anti-Christ, under
the name of Christianity; the rivers of blood, and the oceans of
tears, which would flow during eighteen centuries of error; the mighty
angel who should again commit the Gospel to the earth, for every
nation, kindred, tongue, and people; the judgments of God, in the
downfall of error and mystery; the restitution or restoration of the
Church of the Saints; their final triumph and dominion over the earth;
the descent of Jesus Christ to reign over all kingdoms; the
resurrection of the Saints, and their reign over the earth; the end of
death, and sorrow, and tears, and weeping; were all, _all_ foretold by
the angel to the last of the Twelve.

Again, in the present age, have angels restored the Gospel. Again have
they committed the keys of Apostleship. Again have they opened some of
the events of the past, present, and future.

Again have they attended upon the footsteps of Apostles, Prophets, and
holy Martyrs, from the cradle to the grave. Again have they aided in
the ministry, and assisted to deliver from prisons, and from
persecutions and death, the Saints of the Most High. And again are
they about to execute vengeance on great and notable cities and
nations of the earth.

O what an unspeakable blessing is the ministry of angels to mortal
man! What a pleasing thought, that many who minister to us, and watch
over us, are our near kindred--our fathers who have died and risen
again in former ages, and who watch over their descendants with all
the parental care and solicitude which characterize affectionate
fathers and mothers on the earth.

Thrice happy are they who have lawful claim on their guardianship, and
whose conduct does not grieve them, and constrain them to depart from
their precious charge.

SPIRITS are those who have departed this life, and have not yet been
raised from the dead.

These are of two kinds, viz.--Good and evil.

These two kinds also include many grades of good and evil.

The good spirits, in the superlative sense of the word, are they who,
in this life, partook of the Holy Priesthood, and of the fulness of
the Gospel.

This class of spirits minister to the heirs of salvation, both in this
world and in the world of spirits. They can appear unto men, when
permitted; but not having a fleshly tabernacle, they cannot hide their
glory. Hence, an unembodied spirit, if it be a holy personage, will be
surrounded with a halo of resplendent glory, or brightness, above the
brightness of the sun.

Whereas, spirits not worthy to be glorified will appear without this
brilliant halo; and, although they often attempt to pass as angels of
light, there is more or less of darkness about them.

Many spirits of the departed, who are unhappy, linger in lonely
wretchedness about the earth, and in the air, and especially about
their ancient homesteads, and the places rendered dear to them by the
memory of former scenes. The more wicked of these are the kind spoken
of in Scripture, as "_foul spirits_," "_unclean spirits_," spirits who
afflict persons in the flesh, and engender various diseases in the
human system. They will sometimes enter human bodies, and will
distract them, throw them into fits, cast them into the water, into
the fire, &c. They will trouble them with dreams, nightmare,
hysterics, fever, &c. They will also deform them in body and in
features, by convulsions, cramps, contortions, &c., and will sometimes
compel them to utter blasphemies, horrible curses, and even words of
other languages. If permitted, they will often cause death. Some of
these spirits are adulterous, and suggest to the mind all manner of
lasciviousness, all kinds of evil thoughts and temptations.

A person, on looking another in the eye, who is possessed of an evil
spirit, will feel a shock--a nervous feeling, which will, as it were,
make his hair stand on end; in short, a shock resembling that produced
in a nervous system by the sight of a serpent.

Some of these foul spirits, when possessing a person, will cause a
disagreeable smell about the person thus possessed, which will be
plainly manifest to the senses of those about him, even though the
person thus afflicted should be washed and change his clothes every
few minutes.

There are, in fact, most awful instances of the spirit of lust, and of
bawdy and abominable words and actions, inspired and uttered by
persons possessed of such spirits, even though the persons were
virtuous and modest so long as they possessed their own agency.

Some of these spirits cause deafness, others dumbness, &c.

We can suggest no remedy for these multiplied evils, to which poor
human nature is subject, except a good life, while we are in
possession of our faculties, prayers and fastings of good and holy
men, and the ministry of those who have power given them to rebuke
evil spirits, and cast out devils, in the name of Jesus Christ.

Among the diversified spirits abroad in the world here are many
religious spirits, which are not of God, but which deceive those who
have not the keys of Apostleship and Priesthood, or, in other words,
the keys of the science of Theology to guide them. Some of these
spirits are manifested in the camp-meetings of certain sects, and in
nearly all the excitements and confusions in religious meetings
falsely called "_revivals_." All the strange extacies, swoonings,
screamings, shoutings, dancings, jumpings, and a thousand other
ridiculous and unseemly manifestations, which neither edify nor
instruct, are the fruits of these deceptive spirits.

We must, however, pity, rather than ridicule, or despise, the subjects
or advocates of these deceptions. Many of them are honest, but they
have no Apostles, nor other officers, nor gifts to detect evil, or to
keep them from being led by every delusive spirit.

Real visions, or inspirations which _would_ edify and instruct, they
are taught to deny. Should Peter or Paul, or an angel from heaven,
come among them, they would denounce him as an impostor, with the
assertion that Apostles and angels were no longer needed.

There is still another class of unholy spirits at work in the
world--spirits diverse from all these, far more intelligent, and, if
possible, still more dangerous. These are, the spirit of divination,
vision, foretelling, familiar spirits, "Animal Magnetism,"
"Mesmerism," &c., which reveal many and great truths mixed with the
greatest errors, and also display much intelligence, but have not the
keys of the science of Theology--the Holy Priesthood.

These spirits, generally, deny the divinity of Christ, and the great
truths of the atonement, and of the resurrection of the body. Of such
are the Shakers of the United States, and their revelations. They deny
the resurrection of the body. From this source are the revelations of
Emmanuel Swedenborg, which also deny the resurrection. From this
source, also, are the revelations of Andrew Jackson Davis, of
Poughkeepsie, New York, which deny the resurrection and the atonement.
From this source are all the revelations which deny the ordinances of
the Gospel, and the keys and gifts of the Holy Apostleship.

Last of all, these are they who climb up in some other way, besides
the door, into the sheepfold; and who prophesy or work in their own
name, and not in the name of Jesus Christ.

No man can do a miracle in the name and by the authority of Jesus
Christ, except he be a good man, and authorized by him.




CHAPTER XIII.

DREAMS.


    Mysterious power, whence hope ethereal springs!
    Sweet heavenly relic of eternal things!
    Inspiring oft deep thoughts of things divine:
    The past, the present, and the future thine.
    Thy reminiscences transport the soul
    To memory's Paradise--its future goal.

    "_For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it
    not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep
    falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed: then he
    openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction_." Job
    xxxiii. 14, 15, 16.

In all ages and dispensations God has revealed many important
instructions and warnings to men by means of dreams.

When the outward organs of thought and perception are released from
their activity, the nerves unstrung, and the whole of mortal humanity
lies hushed in quiet slumbers, in order to renew its strength and
vigour, it is then that the spiritual organs are at liberty, in a
certain degree, to assume their wonted functions, to recall some faint
outlines, some confused and half defined recollections, of that
heavenly world, and those endearing scenes of their former estate,
from which they have descended in order to obtain and mature a
tabernacle of flesh. Their kindred spirits, their guardian angels then
hover about them with the fondest affection, the most anxious
solicitude. Spirit communes with spirit, thought meets thought, soul
blends with soul, in all the raptures of mutual, pure, and eternal
love.

In this situation, the spiritual organs are susceptible of converse
with Deity, or of communion with angels, and the spirits of just men
made perfect.

In this situation, we frequently hold communication with our departed
father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter; or with the former
husband or wife of our bosom, whose affection for us, being rooted and
grounded in the eternal elements, or issuing from under the sanctuary
of Love's eternal fountain, can never be lessened or diminished by
death, distance of space, or length of years.

We may, perhaps, have had a friend of the other sex, whose pulse beat
in unison with our own; whose every thought was big with the
aspirations, the hopes of a bright future in union with our own; whose
happiness in time or in eternity, would never be fully consummated
without that union. Such a one, snatched from time in the very bloom of
youth, lives in the other sphere, with the same bright hope, watching
our every footstep, in our meanderings through the rugged path of
life, with longing desires for our eternal happiness, and eager for
our safe arrival in the same sphere.

With what tenderness of love, with what solicitude of affection will
they watch over our slumbers, hang about our pillow, and seek, by
means of the spiritual fluid, to communicate with our spirits, to warn
us of dangers or temptation, to comfort and soothe our sorrow, or to
ward off the ills which might befall us, or perchance to give us some
kind token of remembrance or undying love!

It is the pure in heart, the lovers of truth and virtue, that will
appreciate these remarks, for they know, by at least a small degree of
experience, that these things are so.

Those who are habitually given to vice, immorality and abomination;
those who walk in the daily indulgence of unlawful lust; those who
neither believe in Jesus Christ, nor seek to pray to him, and keep his
commandments; those who do not cultivate the pure, refined and holy
joys of innocent and heavenly affection, but who would sacrifice every
finer feeling at the shrine of lawless pleasure and brutal
desires--those persons will not understand and appreciate these views,
because their good angels, their kindred spirits have long since
departed, and ceased to attend them, being grieved and disgusted with
their conduct.

The Spirit of the Lord has also been grieved, and has left them to
themselves, to struggle alone amid the dangers and sorrows of life; or
to be the associates of demons and impure spirits. Such persons dream
of adultery, gluttony, debauchery, and crimes of every kind. Such
persons have the foreshadowings of a doleful death, and of darkness,
and the buffetings of fiends and malicious spirits.

But, blessed are they who forfeit not their claims to the watchful
care and protection of, and communion with, the heavenly powers, and
pure and lovely spirits.

We can only advise the other classes of mankind, and entreat them, by
the joys of love, by all the desires of life, by all the dread of
death, darkness, and a dreary hereafter, yea, by the blood of Him who
died, by the victory of him who rose in triumph from the grave, by
their regard for those kindred spirits which would gladly love them in
worlds without end, to turn from their sinful course of life, to obey
the ordinances and commandments of Jesus Christ, that the Spirit of
God may return to them, and their good angels and spirits again return
to their sacred charge.

O what a comfort it is, in this dreary world, to be loved and cared
for by all-powerful, warm-hearted, and lovely friends!

_A Dream!_

What have not dreams accomplished?

Dreams and their interpretation brought the beloved son of Jacob from
his dungeon, made him prime minister of Egypt, and the saviour of a
nation, and of his father's house.

Dreams, and the interpretation of dreams, raised a Daniel from slavery
or degrading captivity in Babylon, to wear a royal chain of gold, and
to teach royalty how to rule, whilst himself presided over the
governors and presidents of more than a hundred provinces.

Dreams, and the interpretation of dreams, have opened the future,
pointed out the course of empire through all the troublous times of
successive ages, till Saints alone shall rule, and immortality alone
endure.

Oh, what a doleful situation was Saul the king of Israel placed in,
when the army of the Philistines stood in battle array against him,
and the Lord answered him not, either by dream, by Prophet, by vision,
or by Urim and Thummim!

He sought the unlawful gift of familiar spirits, or "Magnetism." He
there learned his doom, and rushed to battle with the desperation of
hopeless despair.

Himself, his sons, and the hosts of Israel, fell in battle in that
awful day; while David, to whom these gifts had been transferred by
the ordination and holy anointing of Samuel, arose by their use to the
throne of Israel.

A dream announced to Joseph that his virgin wife should have a son. A
dream forewarned him to flee into Egypt with the young child and his
mother. A dream announced to him in Egypt the death of Herod, and
warned him to return to his native land.

A dream warned the wise men from the east to return home another way,
and not return to Herod to betray the young child.

Dreams and visions warned Paul, and the Apostles, and the Saints of
his day, of various dangers, shipwrecks, persecutions and deaths, and
pointed out the means of escape.

Dreams and visions attended and guided them, more or less, in their
whole ministry and sojourn on the earth.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE WORLD OF SPIRITS.


    Ye worlds of light and life, beyond our sphere;
    Mysterious country! let your light appear.
    Ye angels, lift the vail, the truth unfold,
    And give our Seers a glimpse of that bright world;
    Tell where ye live, and what are your employ,
    Your present blessing, and your future joy.
    Say, have you learn'd the name, and tun'd the lyre,
    And hymn'd the praise of him--the great Messiah?
    Have love's emotions kindl'd in your breast,
    And hope enraptur'd seiz'd the promis'd rest?
    Or wait ye still the resurrection day,
    That higher promise of Millennial sway?
    When Saints and angels come to earth again,
    And in the Mesh with King Messiah reign?
    The spirits answer'd as they soar'd away--
    "We're happy now, but wait a greater day,
    When sin and death, and hell, shall conquer'd be,
    And _earth_, with heaven, enjoy the victory."

The spirit of man consists of an organization, or embodiment of the
elements of spiritual matter, in the likeness and after the pattern of
the fleshly tabernacle. It possesses, in fact, all the organs and
parts exactly corresponding to the outward tabernacle.

The entrance of this spirit into its embryo tabernacle of flesh, is
called quickening. The infallible evidence of its presence is
voluntary motion, which implies a degree of independent agency, or
inherent will, which individual identity alone possesses.

When this spirit departs, the outward tabernacle is said to be dead,
that is, the individual who quickened and imparted voluntary motion to
the said tabernacle is no longer there. This individual, on departing
from its earthly house, repasses the dark vale of forgetfulness, and
awakes in the spirit world.

The spirit world is not the heaven where Jesus Christ, his Father, and
other beings dwell, who have, by resurrection or translation, ascended
to eternal mansions, and been crowned and seated on thrones of power;
but it is an intermediate state, a probation, a place of preparation,
improvement, instruction, or education, where spirits are chastened
and improved, and where, if found worthy, they may be taught a
knowledge of the Gospel. In short, it is a place where the Gospel is
preached, and where faith, repentance, hope and charity may be
exercised; a place of waiting for the resurrection or redemption of
the body; while, to those who deserve it, it is a place of punishment,
a purgatory or hell, where spirits are buffetted till the day of
redemption.

As to its location, it is here on the very planet where we were born;
or, in other words, the earth and other planets of a like sphere, have
their inward or spiritual spheres, as well as their outward, or
temporal. The one is peopled by temporal tabernacles, and the other by
spirits. A vail is drawn between the one sphere and the other, whereby
all the objects in the spiritual sphere are rendered invisible to
those in the temporal.

To discern beings or things in the spirit world, a person in the flesh
must be quickened by spiritual element, the vail must be withdrawn, or
the organs of sight, or of hearing, must be transformed, so as to be
adapted to the spiritual sphere. This state is called vision, trance,
second sight, clairvoyance, &c.

The elements and beings in the spirit world are as real and tangible
to spiritual organs, as things and beings of the temporal world are to
beings of a temporal state.

In this spirit world there are all the varieties and grades of
intellectual being, which exist in the present world. For instance,
Jesus Christ and the thief on the cross, both went to the same place,
and found themselves associated in the spirit world.

But the one was there in all the intelligence, happiness, benevolence,
and charity, which characterized a teacher, a messenger, anointed to
preach glad tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken-hearted, to
comfort those who mourned, to preach deliverance to the captive, and
open the prison to those who were bound; or, in other words, _To
preach the Gospel to the spirits in prison, that they might he judged
according to men in the flesh_; while the other was there as a thief,
who had expired on the cross for crime, and who was guilty, ignorant,
uncultivated, and unprepared for resurrection, having need of
remission of sins, and to be instructed in the science of salvation.

The former bid farewell to the world of spirits on the third day, and
returned to his tabernacle of flesh, in which he ascended to thrones,
principalities, and powers, while the latter is, no doubt, improving
in the spirit world, and waiting, believing, hoping for the redemption
of the body.

In the world of spirits there are Apostles, Prophets, Elders, and
members of the Church of the Saints, holding keys of Priesthood, and
power to teach, comfort, instruct, and proclaim the Gospel to, their
fellow-spirits, after the pattern of Jesus Christ.

In the same world there are also the spirits of Catholics, and
Protestants of every sect, who have all need to be taught, and to come
to the knowledge of the true, unchangeable Gospel, in its fulness and
simplicity, that they may be judged the same as if they had been
privileged with the same in the flesh.

There is also the Jew, the Mahometan, the infidel, who did not believe
in Christ while in the flesh. All these must be taught, must come to
the knowledge of the crucified and risen Redeemer, and hear the glad
tidings of the Gospel.

There are also all the varieties of the heathen spirits; the noble and
refined philosopher, poet, patriot, or statesman of Rome or Greece;
the enlightened Socrates, Plato, and their like; together with every
grade of spirits, down to the most uncultivated of the savage world.

All these must be taught, enlightened, and must bow the knee to the
eternal king, for the decree hath gone forth, that unto him every knee
shall bow and every tongue confess.

O what a field of labour, of benevolence, of missionary enterprise now
opens to the Apostles and Elders of the Church of the Saints! As this
field opens they will begin to realize more fully the extent of their
divine mission, and the meaning of the great command to "_Preach the
Gospel to every creature_."

In this vast field of labour, the Priesthood are, in a great measure,
occupied, during their sojourn in the world of spirits while awaiting
the resurrection of the body; and at the same time they themselves are
edified, improved, and greatly advanced and matured in the science of
divine Theology.

In the use of the keys of this science, by them administered, and in
connexion with the ministration of certain ordinances, by the
Priesthood in this mortal life, for, and in behalf of, those who are
dead, the doors of the prisons of the spirit world are opened, and
their gloomy dungeons made radiant with light. Hope then springs
afresh. Joy and gladness swell the bosom accustomed to anguish, and
smiles assume the place of tears, while songs of triumph, and the
voice of melody and thanksgiving occupy the hearts, and flow from the
lips, of those who have long dwelt in darkness, and in the region and
shadow of death.

The times of sojourn of a spirit in the world of spirits, and also its
privileges and degrees of enjoyment, or of suffering, while there,
depend much on its preparations while in the flesh.

For instance, the people swept off by the flood of Noah, were
imprisoned in the world of spirits, in a kind of hell; without
justification, without Priesthood or Gospel, without the true
knowledge of God, or a hope of resurrection, during those long ages
which intervened between the flood and the death of Christ. It was
only by the personal ministry of the spirit of Jesus Christ, during
his sojourn in the spirit world, that they were at length privileged
to hear the Gospel, and to act upon their own agency, the same as men
in the flesh; whereas, if they had repented at the preaching of Noah,
they might have been justified, and filled with the hope and knowledge
of the resurrection while in the flesh.

When Jesus Christ had returned from his mission in the spirit world,
had triumphed over the grave, and re-entered his fleshly tabernacle,
then the Saints who had obeyed the Gospel while in the flesh, and had
slept in death, or finished their sojourn in the spirit world, were
called forth to re-enter their bodies, and to ascend with him to
mansions and thrones of eternal power, while the residue of the
spirits remained in the world of spirits to await another call.

Those who obeyed the Gospel on the earth, after this first
resurrection, will also be called from their sojourn in the spirit
world, and re-united with their tabernacles of flesh, at the sounding
of the next trump, and will reign on the earth in the flesh, one
thousand years, while those who rejected the Gospel will remain in the
spirit world without a resurrection, till after the thousand years.

Again, those who obey the Gospel in the present age will rise from the
spirit world, and from the grave, and reign on the earth during the
great thousand years; while those who reject it will remain in
condemnation in the spirit world, without a resurrection, till the
last trump shall sound, and death and hell deliver up their dead.




CHAPTER XV.

RESURRECTION, ITS TIMES AND DEGREES--FIRST, SECOND AND THIRD HEAVENS,
OR THE TELESTIAL, TERRESTRIAL AND CELESTIAL KINGDOMS.


    The grave and death and hell no more retain
    Their lawful captives. Earth yields its slain.
    The raging ocean, from its lowly bed,
    At Michael's call, delivers up its dead.
    Then comes the judgment, and the final doom
    Of man--his destiny beyond the tomb.

There are three general resurrections revealed to man on the earth;
one of these is past, and the other two are future.

The first general resurrection took place in connexion with the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. This included the Saints and Prophets of
both hemispheres, from Adam down to John the Baptist; or, in other
words, all those who died in Christ before his resurrection.

The second will take place in a few years from the present time, and
will be immediately succeeded by the coming of Jesus Christ, in power
and great glory, with all his Saints and Angels. This resurrection
will include the Former and Latter-day Saints--all those who have
received the Gospel since the former resurrection.

The third and last resurrection will take place more than a thousand
years afterwards, and will embrace all the human family not included
in the former resurrections or translations.

After man is raised from the dead he will be judged according to his
works, and will receive the reward, and be consigned to the sphere,
exactly corresponding to his former deeds, and the preparations or
qualifications which he possesses.

In the former resurrection, those raised left the earth and ascended,
or, were transplanted far on high, with the risen Jesus, to the
glorified mansions of his Father, or to some planetary system already
redeemed and glorified. The reasons for thus leaving the earth are
obvious. Our planet was still in its rudimental state, and therefore
subject to the rule of sin and death. It was necessary that it should
continue thus, until the full time of redemption should arrive; it
was, therefore, entirely unfitted for the residence of immortal man.

But in the resurrection which now approaches, and in connexion with
the glorious coming of Jesus Christ, the earth will undergo a change
in its physical features, climate, soil, productions; and in its
political, moral, and spiritual government.

Its mountains will be levelled, its valleys exalted, its swamps and
sickly places will be drained and become healthy, while its burning
deserts, and its frigid polar regions, will be redeemed and become
temperate and fruitful.

Kingcraft and priestcraft, tyranny, oppression and idolatry will be at
an end, darkness and ignorance will pass away, war will cease, and the
rule of sin, and sorrow, and death will give place to the reign of
peace, and truth, and righteousness.

For this reason, and to fulfil certain promises made to the Fathers,
the Former and Latter-day Saints included in the two resurrections,
and all those translated, will then receive an inheritance on the
earth, and will build upon and improve the same for a thousand years.

The heathen nations, also, will then be redeemed, and will be exalted
to the privilege of serving the Saints of the Most High. They will be
the ploughmen, the vine-dressers, the gardeners, builders, etc. But
the Saints will be the owners of the soil, the proprietors of all real
estate, and other precious things; and the kings, governors, and
judges of the earth.

As the children of man multiply in those peaceful times, a careful and
wise system of agriculture will be rapidly developed, and extended
over the face of the whole earth; its entire surface will at length
become like the garden of Eden, the trees of life being cultivated,
and their fruits enjoyed.

Science, and the useful and ornamental arts, will also be greatly
extended and cultivated. The fine toned instrument of many strings,
the melodious organs of the human voice, will then be tuned to poetry
and sentiments equally pure and refined, and will pour forth melodies
and strains of holy joy, calculated to purify and melt every heart in
love, and fill every soul with mutual sympathy and extasy of heavenly
union.

Geographical knowledge, history, astronomy, mathematics and
navigation, will be greatly extended and matured. Railroads and
telegraphic lines of communication, will be universally extended, and
the powers of steam, or other means of locomotion brought to the
highest state of perfection.

Thus all nations will be associated in one great brotherhood. A
universal Theocracy will cement the whole body politic. One king will
rule. One holy city will compose the capitol. One temple will be the
centre of worship. In short, there will be one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, and one Spirit.

One equable, just and useful commercial interest, founded on the
necessity and convenience of mutual exchange of products, will also
form another important bond of union.

Mineralogy will also be greatly improved, and its knowledge extended.
Its hidden treasures will be developed, and gold, silver and the most
precious and beautiful stones will be the building materials in most
common use, and will compose the utensils and furniture of the
habitations of man.

The earth and man thus restored and exalted, will not yet be perfect
in the celestial sense of the word, but will be considered, in the
light of eternity, as occupying an intermediate and still progressive
position amid the varieties of nature.

The flesh, bones, sinews, nerves--all the organs--all the particles of
the celestial body, must be quickened, filled, surrounded with that
divine and holy element, which is purer, more intelligent, more
refined and active, fuller of light and life, than any other substance
in the universe.

Every organ must be restored, and adapted to its natural and perfect
use in the celestial body.

    The Greek Philosopher's immortal mind,
    Again with flesh and bone and nerve combined;
    Immortal brain and heart--immortal whole,
    Will make, as at the first, a living soul.

Man, thus adapted to all the enjoyments of life and love, will possess
the means of gratifying his organs of sight, hearing, taste, &c., and
will possess, improve and enjoy the riches of the eternal elements.
The palace, the city, the garden, the vineyard, the fruits of the
earth, the gold, the silver, the precious stones, the servants, the
chariots, horses and horsemen are for his use; also thrones and
dominions, principalities and powers, might, majesty, and an eternal
increase of riches, honours, immortality and eternal life are his. He
is, in a subordinate sense, a god; or, in other words, one of the sons
of God. All things are his, and he is Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Such is the great Millennium.

And such is _celestial_ man, in his progress towards perfection.

Besides the peculiar glory of the _celestial_, there are in the
resurrection and final reward of man, many subordinate spheres, many
degrees of reward adapted to an almost infinite variety of
circumstances, conditions, degrees of improvement, knowledge,
accountability and conduct.

The final state of man, though varying in almost infinite gradations
and rewards, adapted to his qualifications and deserts, and meted out
in the scale of exact justice and mercy, may be conceived or expressed
under three grand heads, or principal spheres, viz.--

First. The Telestial, or least heaven, typified by the stars of the
firmament.

Secondly. The Terrestrial, or intermediate heaven, typified by the
moon.

Thirdly. The Celestial, or third heaven, of which the sun of the
firmament is typical.

The qualifications which fit and prepare intelligences, for these
different spheres or rewards, are an all important consideration, and
well worthy of the sincere attention of all people.

These several kingdoms or degrees, and their comparative happiness,
and what characters are candidates for each degree, are revealed in a
most concise, clear, lucid and beautiful manner, in one of the visions
of our great Prophet and founder. We will therefore complete this
chapter by the insertion of said

                            "VISION.

"Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice, ye
inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no
Saviour: great is His wisdom, marvellous are His ways, and the extent
of His doings none can find out; His purposes fail not, neither are
there any who can stay His hand; from eternity to eternity He is the
same, and His years never fail.

"For thus saith the Lord, I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto
those who fear me, and delight to honour those who serve me in
righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward
and eternal shall be their glory; and to them will I reveal all
mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of
old, and for ages to come will I make known unto them the good
pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom;
yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come
will I show them, even the things of many generations; and their
wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven: and
before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding
of the prudent shall come to naught, for by my Spirit will I enlighten
them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my
will; yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor yet entered into the heart of man.

"We, Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit on the
sixteenth of February, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-two, by the power of the Spirit our eyes were
opened and our understandings were enlightened, so as to see and
understand the things of God--even those things which were from the
beginning, before the world was, which were ordained of the Father,
through His only begotten Son, who was in the bosom of the Father,
even from the beginning, of whom we bear record, and the record which
we bear is the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son,
whom we saw and with whom we conversed in the heavenly vision; for
while we were doing the work of translation, which the Lord had
appointed unto us, we came to the twenty-ninth verse of the fifth
chapter of John, which was given unto us as follows. Speaking of the
resurrection of the dead, concerning those who shall hear the voice of
the Son of man, and shall come forth; they who have done good in the
resurrection of the just, and they who have done evil in the
resurrection of the unjust. Now this caused us to marvel, for it was
given unto us of the Spirit; and while we meditated upon these things,
the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened,
and the glory of the Lord shone round about; and we beheld the glory
of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his
fulness; and saw the holy angels, and they who are sanctified before
His throne, worshipping God and the Lamb, who worship Him for ever and
ever. And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of
him, this is the testimony last of all, which we give of him, that he
lives; for we saw him, even on the right hand of God, and we heard the
voice bearing record that he is the only begotten of the Father--that
by him and through him, and of him the worlds are and were created,
and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.
And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in
authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the only
begotten Son, whom the Father loved, and who was in the bosom of the
Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was
called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him--he was Lucifer, a son
of the morning. And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen! even a
son of the morning. And while we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord
commanded us that we should write the vision, for we beheld Satan,
that old serpent--even the devil, who rebelled against God, and sought
to take the kingdom of our God, and His Christ, wherefore he maketh
war with the Saints of God, and encompasses them round about. And we
saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he made war and
overcame, for thus came the voice of the Lord unto us.

"Thus saith the Lord, concerning all those who know my power, and have
been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves, through the
power of the devil, to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my
power--they are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that
it had been better for them never to have been born, for they are
vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil
and his angels in eternity; concerning whom I have said there is no
forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come, having denied the
Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the only
begotten Son of the Father--having crucified him unto themselves, and
put him to an open shame. These are they who shall go away into the
lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels, and the
only ones on whom the second death shall have any power; yea, verily,
the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord,
after the sufferings of his wrath; for all the rest shall be brought
forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the
glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father
before the worlds were made. And this is the Gospel, the glad tidings
which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us, that he came
into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear
the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it
from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved whom the
Father had put into his power and made by him, who glorifies the
Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of
perdition, who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him;
wherefore, he saves all except them; they shall go away into
everlasting punishment, which is endless punishment, which is eternal
punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched, which is their
torment; and the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their
torment, no man knows, neither was it revealed, neither is, neither
will be revealed unto man, except to them who are made partakers
thereof: nevertheless I, the Lord, show it by vision unto many, but
straightway shut it up again; wherefore the end, the width, the
height, the depth, and the misery thereof, they understand not,
neither any man except them who are ordained unto this condemnation.
And we heard the voice, saying, Write the vision, for lo! this is the
end of the vision of the sufferings of the ungodly!

"And again we bear record, for we saw and heard, and this is the
testimony of the Gospel of Christ, concerning them who come forth in
the resurrection of the just; they are they who received the testimony
of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner
of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this
according to the commandment, which he has given, that by keeping the
commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins,
and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who
is ordained and sealed unto this power, and who overcome by faith, and
are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth
upon all those who are just and true. They are they who are the Church
of the first born. They are they into whose hands the Father has given
all things. They are they who are priests and kings, who have received
of His fulness, and of His glory, and are priests of the Most High,
after the order of Melchisedek, which was after the order of Enoch,
which was after the order of the only begotten Son; wherefore, as it
is written, they are gods, even the sons of God; wherefore all things
are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to
come, all are theirs and they are Christ's and Christ is God's; and
they shall overcome all things; wherefore let no man glory in man, but
rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under His
feet--these shall dwell in the presence of God and His Christ for ever
and ever. These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall
come in the clouds of heaven, to reign on the earth over his people.
These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection. These
are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just. These
are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living
God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all. These are they who have
come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and
Church of Enoch, and of the first born. These are they whose names are
written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all. These
are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of
the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the
shedding of his own blood. These are they whose bodies are celestial
whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of
all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being
typical.

"And again, we saw the terrestrial world, and behold and lo, these are
they who are of the terrestrial, whose glory differs from that of the
Church of the first-born, who have received the fulness of the Father,
even as that of the moon differs from the sun in the firmament--
behold, these are they who died without law, and also they who are the
spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the
Gospel unto, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh,
who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards
received it. These are they who are honourable men of the earth, who
were blinded by the craftiness of men. These are they who receive of
his glory, but not of his fulness. These are they who receive of the
presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father; wherefore,
they are bodies terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and differ in
glory as the moon differs from the sun. These are they who are not
valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore they obtained not the
crown over the kingdom of our God. And now this is the end of the
vision which we saw of the terrestrial, that the Lord commanded us to
write while we were yet in the Spirit.

"And again, we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that of
the lesser, even as the glory of the stars differs from that of the
moon in the firmament. These are they who received not the Gospel of
Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus. These are they who deny not
the Holy Spirit. These are they who are thrust down to hell. These are
they who shall not be redeemed from the devil, until the last
resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have
finished his work. These are they who receive not of his fulness in
the eternal world, but of the Holy Spirit, through the ministration of
the terrestrial; and the terrestrial through the ministration of the
celestial; and also the telestial receive it of the administering of
angels who are appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to
be ministering spirits for them, for they shall be heirs of salvation.
And thus we saw in the heavenly vision, the glory of the telestial,
which surpasses all understanding, and no man knows it except him to
whom God has revealed it. And thus we saw the glory of the
terrestrial, which excels in all things the glory of the telestial,
even in glory, and in power, and in might, and in dominion. And thus
we saw the glory of the celestial which excels in all things--where
God, even the Father, reigns upon His throne for ever and ever; before
whose throne all things bow in humble reverence and give Him glory for
ever and ever. They who dwell in His presence are the Church of the
first-born, and they see as they are seen, and know as they are known,
having received of His fulness and of His grace; and He makes them
equal in power, and in might, and in dominion. And the glory of the
celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one. And the glory
of the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one. And
the glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is
one, for as one star differs from another star in glory, even so
differs one from another in glory in the telestial world; for these
are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas. These are
they who say they are some of one and some of another--some of Christ,
and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of
Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch; but received not the
Gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the Prophets, neither
the Everlasting Covenant. Last of all, these all are they who will not
be gathered with the Saints, to be caught up unto the Church of the
firstborn, and received into the cloud. These are they who are liars,
and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves
and makes a lie. These are they who suffer the wrath of God on the
earth. These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. These
are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty
God, until the fulness of times when Christ shall have subdued all
enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work, when he
shall deliver up the Kingdom, and present it unto the Father spotless,
saying--I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even
the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. Then
shall he be crowned with the crown of His glory, to sit on the throne
of his power to reign for ever and ever. But behold, and lo, we saw
the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial world, that they were
as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven, or as the sand
upon the sea shore, and heard the voice of the Lord saying--these all
shall bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits
upon the throne for ever and ever; for they shall be judged according
to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own
works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared, and they
shall be servants of the Most High, but where God and Christ dwell
they cannot come, worlds without end. This is the end of the vision
which we saw, which we were commanded to write while we were yet in
the Spirit.

"But great and marvellous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries
of His kingdom which He showed unto us, which surpasses all
understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion, which He
commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and
are not lawful for man to utter; neither is man capable to make them
known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the
Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love Him, and purify
themselves before Him; to whom He grants this privilege of seeing and
knowing for themselves; that through the power and manifestation of
the Spirit, while in the flesh, they may be able to bear His presence
in the world of glory. And to God and the Lamb be glory, and honour,
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."




CHAPTER XVI.

FURTHER REMARKS ON MAN'S PHYSICAL AND INTELLECTUAL
PROGRESS--PHILOSOPHY OF WILL, AS ORIGINATING, DIRECTING, AND
CONTROLLING ALL VOLUNTARY ANIMAL MOTION--ASTOUNDING FACTS IN RELATION
TO THE SPEED, OR VELOCITY OF MOTION, AS ATTAINABLE BY PHYSICAL
MAN--INTERCOMMUNICATION OF THE INHABITANTS OF DIFFERENT AND DISTANT
PLANETS.


    Wide, and more wide, the kindling bosom swells,
    As love inspires, and truth its wonders tells.
    The soul enraptured tunes the sacred lyre.
    And bids a worm of earth to heaven aspire,
    Mid solar systems numberless, to soar,
    The depths of love and science to explore.

As I have before remarked, man is a candidate for a series of
progressive changes, all tending to develop his intellectual and
physical faculties, to expand his mind, and to enlarge his sphere of
action, and consequent usefulness and happiness.

He begins his physical, or rudimental, fleshly career by descending
below all things. He has at his birth less power of locomotion, or
even instinct, than other animals.

His powers of motion are so very limited, that for several months he
is entirely unable to change his locality. Wherever he is placed,
there he must remain until removed by the agency of others. He can
hardly be said to have a will, or, at least, it is so undeveloped, as
scarcely to manifest itself by any effort beyond the movement of some
portion of his members. While he remains in this state of mental
inability and physical helplessness, a casual observer, entirely
unacquainted with his progress and destiny, might very naturally
conclude that this was the climax of his maturity, the natural sphere
of his eternal existence.

A few months, however, develop a marked change--he begins to learn the
use, and put forth the powers of his will. The body, developed in a
commensurate degree, is able to obey that will. Thus commences
locomotion. The child crawls or creeps about the floor; explores the
little world--that is to say, the room where he resides, or the
adjoining apartment--becomes familiar with its dimensions, bearings
and contents, and recognizes his associates or fellow citizens of the
same little world. Then he becomes familiar with the science of
geography and of history, if I may so call it, in his little world.

Prompted by curiosity, he may, perhaps, cast an occasional glance
beyond the limits of his own abode. He may contemplate a building or
landscape on the other side of the street or field, but with much of
the same feeling as a man, more matured, casts his eyes to the distant
planets. He concludes that these distant objects are entirely beyond
the reach of his powers of locomotion.

In a short time, however, his faculties, still expanding, develop new
and increasing energies. He conceives "_big thoughts_." He even thinks
of dispensing with his plodding, creeping manner of locomotion, and of
trying to stand upright, and even make a first step towards walking.
It is a great undertaking. He hesitates, doubts, fears, hopes, till
finally, being cheered onward in his career by his parents or his
nurse, he makes the attempt. After several falls, failures, and
disappointments, he at length succeeds in walking two or three steps.
O what a triumph in his powers of locomotion! He is cheered, embraced,
overwhelmed, by those who have been watching his progress and
encouraging him, until, overcome and carried away by an extasy of
transport, he falls, blushing, smiling and exulting into the arms held
out for his reception. He dreams not of a higher attainment. He is
now, in his own estimation, at the very highest pinnacle of human
development.

Improving in his new mode of locomotion, he soon runs about the yard,
along the street, through the field, makes new discoveries, sees new
habitations, enlarges his geographical knowledge, and begins to
conceive the probability that his views have been too narrow, and that
there may be a bigger world, more people, and more buildings than were
dreamed of in his philosophy.

In a few years he may become familiar with the geography and history
of the island or continent on which he lives. He may even begin to
aspire after the knowledge of other climes, and to conceive or
conjecture that beyond the limits of the almost infinite expanse of
waters, things and beings may exist after the similitude of his own
sphere. He longs to overcome the physical barriers, which confine him
in so limited a sphere, and thus enlarge his acquaintance, his social
feelings, his friendship, his affections and his scientific knowledge.

So boundless and varied is the field, so complicated are the obstacles
to be surmounted, so vast the preparations, improvements and
inventions to be brought into requisition, that, after ages and
generations have exhausted their energies, much is still left to be
done--much which can only be done by the progress and extension of
those modern triumphs of art, by which the elements--the fire, the
wind, the water, the lightning, submit to the control of man, and
become his chariot, his bearer of despatches. By these means the globe
we occupy will soon be explored, the limits, boundaries and resources
of every dark corner be clearly defined and understood.

Man already moves over the surface of the earth at the rate of fifty,
sixty, and even ninety miles per hour, and still he aspires. He
contemplates making the air his chariot, and wafting himself through
the open firmament at the rate of, perhaps, a thousand miles per hour.
Suppose he attains to this, what then? Will the great, the infinite
principle within him be satisfied? No. He lifts his eyes to the
contemplation of those myriads of shining orbs on high. He knows by
actual admeasurement that some of them are much larger than the planet
he occupies. He also knows by analogy that eternal riches are there;
that a boundless store of element and resources is there; that they
are treasured there for the use, comfort, convenience, and enjoyment,
of intellectual and physical beings--beings, for aught he knows, of
his own species, and connected with him by kindred ties, or by the law
of universal sympathy and affection. He has reason to believe that
there is gold and silver, that there are precious stones, and houses,
and cities, and gardens. That there are walks of pleasure, and
fountains, forests, brooks, and rivers of delight; that there are
bosoms fraught with life and joy, and swelling with all the tender
sensibilities of a pure, holy and never-ending affection.

Why, then, should his aspirations not reach forth, his mind expand,
his bosom swell with love, and his heart beat with the boundless,
fathomless infinitude of thought, of feeling, and of love? Why not be
noble and boundless in charity, like the God whom he calls his father?
Why does he not rise from his groveling sphere in this small island,
which floats in the ocean of space, as a small black speck, amid the
numberless shining orbs? The reason is obvious; it is not for the want
of noble aspirations; it is not for the want of grand conceptions; it
is not for the lack of will. It is because the body is chained,
imprisoned, confined here, by the operation or attraction of
surrounding elements, which man has not yet discovered the means to
control. It may be said that the powers of earth enslave him, and
chain him down, beyond the possibility or hope of escape.

Reader, in order to illustrate this subject try an experiment on your
own physical and mental powers. For instance; _will_ your arm to move,
and it will instantly obey you. _Will_ your body to go three miles,
and it will obey you as fast as it can; perhaps in one hour it will
have accomplished the journey assigned to it by your will.

But tie your hand behind you, and then _will_ it to move up and down,
forward and backward, and it will make the effort to obey you, but
cannot, because it is confined. Chain your body in a dungeon, bolt and
bar the door, and will it to go to a certain place, and it will not
obey you, because it is physically incapable.

Unchain this body, provide the means of conveyance at the rate of a
mile per minute, the body, at the bidding of the _will_, will then go
the three miles in three minutes.

Now, if it were possible to overcome the resisting elements, so as to
increase the speed of conveyance for your body--that is, if there were
no resisting element to be overcome, your will might dictate, and your
body would move through actual space with the speed of light, or
electricity. There is no apparent limit to the speed attainable by the
body when unchained, set free from the elements which now enslave it,
and dictated by the will.

    "The lightning on its wiry way would lag behind.
    The sun-ray drag its slow length along."

This immense velocity of locomotion, as applied to a body of flesh and
bones, or of material elements, may at first thought, strike the mind
as being contrary to the known laws of physical motion.

But let it be recollected that the vast earth on which we dwell, with
all its weight and bulk, its cities, animals and intelligences, moves
through actual space, at the astonishing velocity of eighteen miles
per second, one thousand and eighty miles per minute, or sixty-four
thousand eight hundred miles per hour.

If so vast a bulk of gross, and in a great measure inanimate matter,
can move through space, at a rate of speed so inconceivably great, how
easily we can conceive the probability of vastly increased powers of
locomotion on the part of animate bodies released from their earthly
prison, quickened by superior and celestial element, dictated by an
independent, inherent principle called the will, and urged onward by
the promptings of the eternal, infinite mind and affections, in their
aspirations for knowledge and enjoyment.

A corporeal, human body, raised from the dead, and quickened by
elements so refined, so full of life and motion, so pure, and so free
from the influences control, or attractions of more gross elements,
will, like the risen Jesus, ascend and descend at will, and with a
speed nearly instantaneous.

Let us pause, and contemplate, for a moment, such a being taking leave
of the confines of the earth, and sea, and clouds, and air, with all
their dark and gloomy shadows. Behold him as he speeds his way on the
upper deep, and launches forth in the clear and boundless expanse
bespangled with millions of resplendent orbs.

He calculates his distance, and regulates his course by observing the
relative position of those most familiar to him, and soaring upwards
still, his bosom swells with an unutterable and overwhelming sensation
of the infinitude of his own eternal being, and of all around, above,
below him, till unable to contain his gratitude, and joy, and
exultation, he breaks forth in the language of a celebrated British
poet, and sings as he flies--

    "Heavens broad day hath o'er me broken,
    Far above earth's span of sky!
    Am I dead? Nay, by this token,
    Know that I have ceased to die!"

Planets will be visited, messages communicated, acquaintances and
friendships formed, and the sciences vastly extended and cultivated.

The science of geography will then be extended to millions of worlds,
and will embrace a knowledge of their physical features and
boundaries, their resources, mineral and vegetable; their rivers,
lakes, seas, continents and islands; the attainments of their
inhabitants in the science of government; their progress in revealed
religion; their employments, dress, manners, customs, &c. The science
of astronomy will also be enlarged in proportion to the means of
knowledge. System after system will rise to view in the vast field of
research and exploration! Vast systems of suns and their attendant
worlds, on which the eyes of Adam's race, in their rudimental sphere,
have never gazed, will then be contemplated, circumscribed, weighed in
the balance of human thought, their circumference and diameter be
ascertained, their relative distances understood. Their motions and
revolutions, their times and laws, their hours, days, weeks, sabbaths,
months, years, jubilees, centuries, millenniums and eternities, will
all be told in the volumes of science.

The science of history will embrace the vast "univercoelum" of the
past and present. It will in its vast compilations, embrace and
include all nations, all ages, and all generations; all the planetary
systems in all their varied progress and changes, in all their
productions and attributes.

It will trace our race in all its successive emigrations, colonies,
states, kingdoms and empires; from their first existence on the great,
central, governing planet, or sun, called Kolob, until they are
increased without number, and widely dispersed and transplanted from
one planet to another, until, occupying the very confines of
infinitude, the mind of immortal, eternal man, is absorbed,
overwhelmed, wearied with the vastness, the boundless expanse of
historic fact, and compelled to return and retire within itself for
refreshment, rest and renewed vigour.

Next in order, will be the field of prophetic science. The spirit of
prophecy will be poured upon the immortal mind, till, from seeing in
part, and knowing in part, man will be able to gaze upon a boundless
prospective, a future of still increasing glory, knowledge, light,
love, might, majesty, power and dominion, in which the sons of God-the
kings and priests of heaven and earth, and of the heaven of heavens,
and all their retinue of kingdoms and subjects, will find ample room
for boundless increase and improvement, worlds without end. Amen.




CHAPTER XVII.

LAWS OF MARRIAGE AND PROCREATION.


    Ye kindred spirits, filled with mutual love,
    Pure as the dews descending from above,
    All hail! for you the sacred Keys are given,
    To make you one on earth, and one in heaven.
    Be fruitful then, and let your race extend;
    Fill Earth, the stars, and worlds that never end.

The great science of life consists in the knowledge of ourselves, the
laws of our existence, the relations we sustain to each other, to
things and beings around us, to our ancestry, to our posterity, to
time, to eternity, to our heavenly Father, and to the universe.

To understand these laws, and regulate our actions by them, is the
whole duty of intelligences. It should therefore comprise our whole
study.

This science comprises the fountain of wisdom, the well-springs of
life, the boundless ocean of knowledge, the infinitude of light, and
truth, and love. It penetrates the depths, soars to the heights, and
circumscribes the broad expanse of eternity.

Its pursuit leads to exaltation, glory, immortality, and to an
eternity of life, light, purity, and unity of fellowship with kindred
spirits.

To contemplate man in his true light, we must, as it were, forget that
death is in his path; we must look upon him as an eternal, ever living
being, possessing spirit, flesh and bones, with all the mental and
physical organs, and all the affections and sympathies which
characterise him in this world. Or rather, all his natural affections
and sympathies will be purified, exalted, and immeasurably increased.

Let the candidate for celestial glory forget, for a moment, the
groveling sphere of his present existence, and make the effort to
contemplate himself in the light of eternity, in the higher spheres of
his progressive existence, beyond the grave--a pure spirit, free from
sin and guile, enlightened in the school of heaven, by observation and
experience, and association with the highest order of intelligences,
for thousands of years; and clothed with immortal flesh, in all the
vigour, freshness and beauty of eternal youth; alike free from pain,
disease, death, and the corroding effects of time; looking back
through the vista of far distant years, and contemplating his former
sojourn amid the sorrows and pains of mortal life, his passage through
the dark valley of death, and his sojourn in the spirit world, as we
now contemplate a transient dream, or a night of sleep, from which we
have awakened, renewed and refreshed, to enter again upon the
realities of life.

Let us contemplate, for a moment, such a being, clothed in the finest
robes of linen, pure and white, adorned with precious stones and gold;
a countenance radiant with the effulgence of light, intelligence and
love; a bosom glowing with all the confidence of conscious innocence
dwelling in palaces of precious stones and gold; bathing in the
crystal waters of life; promenading or sitting 'neath the evergreen
bowers and trees of Eden; inhaling the healthful breezes, perfumed
with odours, wafted from the roses and pinks of paradise, or assembled
with the countless myriads of heaven's nobility, to join in songs of
praise and adoration to the Great Parent of every good, to tune the
immortal lyre in strains celestial; or move with grace immortal to the
soul-inspiring measure of music flowing from a thousand instruments,
blending, in harmonious numbers, with celestial voices, in heavenly
song, or mingling in graceful circles with joyous thousands, immersed
in the same spirit, and moving in unison and harmony of motion, as if
one heart, one pulse, one thrill of heavenly melody inspired the
whole.

O candidates for celestial glory! Would your joys be full in the
countless years of eternity without forming the connexions, the
relationship, the kindred ties which concentrate in the domestic
circle, and branch forth, and bud and blossom, and bear the fruits of
eternal increase?

Would that eternal emotion of charity and benevolence which swells
your bosoms be satisfied to enjoy in, "single blessedness," without an
increase of posterity, those exhaustless stores of never-ending riches
and enjoyments? Or, would you, like your heavenly Father, prompted by
eternal benevolence and charity, wish to fill countless millions of
worlds, with your begotten sons and daughters, and to bring them
through all the gradations of progressive being, to inherit immortal
bodies, and eternal mansions in your several dominions?

If such be your aspirations, remember that this present probation is
the world of preparation for joys eternal. This is the place where
family organization is first formed for eternity; and where the
kindred sympathies, relationships, and affections take root, spring
forth, shoot upward, bud, blossom, and bear fruit to ripen and mature
in eternal ages.

_Here_, in the holy temples and sanctuaries of our God, must the
everlasting covenants be revealed, ratified, sealed, bound and
recorded in the holy records, and guarded and preserved in the
archives of God's kingdom, by those who hold the keys of eternal
Apostleship, who have power to bind on earth that which shall be bound
in heaven, and to record on earth that which shall be recorded in the
archives of heaven, in the Lamb's book of life.

_Here_, in the holy sanctuary, must be revealed, ordained and anointed
the kings and queens of eternity.

All vows, covenants, contracts, marriages, of unions, not formed by
revelation, and sealed for time and all eternity, and recorded in the
holy archives of earth and heaven, by the ministration of the holy and
eternal Priesthood, will be dissolved by death, and will not be
recognised by the eternal authorities, after the parties have entered
through the vail into the eternal world.

This is heaven's eternal law, as revealed to the ancients of all ages,
who held the keys of eternal priesthood, after the order of the Son of
God; and, as restored with the priesthood of the Saints of this age.

Again, it was a law of the ancient Priesthood, and is again restored,
that a man who is faithful in all things, may, by the word of the
Lord, through the administration of one holding the keys to bind on
earth and heaven, receive and secure to himself, for time and all
eternity, MORE THAN ONE WIFE.

Thus did Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Patriarchs and Prophets of
old.

The principal object contemplated by this law, is the multiplication
of the children of good and worthy fathers, who will teach them the
truth, and train them in the holy principles of salvation. This is far
preferable to sending them into the world in the lineage of an
unworthy or ignorant parentage, to be educated in error, folly,
ignorance and crime.

The peculiar characteristics of the blessings included in the
Everlasting Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their
lineage, was the multiplicity of their seed; and the perpetuity of the
royal, priestly and kingly power in their lineage.

To assist in carrying out and fulfilling this covenant, good and
virtuous women were given to their faithful Prophets, rulers, and wise
and virtuous men; and, as it was said of the four wives of Jacob,
"_These did build the house of Israel_."

While peculiar blessings and encouragements were given to a good and
faithful man, and to his wives and children; while they were honoured
of God, and respected by all who knew them; while the father of a
hundred children was had in greater honour than the hero of a hundred
battles, adultery, fornication, and all unlawful intercourse was
strictly prohibited, and even punished by the strictest laws--the
penalty of which was death.

A daughter of Israel, who, by prostitution, was rendered unworthy, or
unqualified for the duties of a virtuous wife and mother, was
considered unfit to live. While the male who would thus trifle with
the fountain of life, and contribute to render a female unworthy to
answer the end of her creation, was also condemned to death.

Strict laws were also given and diligently taught to both sexes,
regulating the intercourse between husband and wife. All intercourse
peculiar to the sexes was strictly prohibited at certain seasons which
were untimely. Nor were the bonds of wedlock and shield from
condemnation, where the parties, by untimely union, excess, or
voluntary act, prevented propagation, or injured the life or health of
themselves or their offspring.

The object of the union of the sexes is the propagation of their
species, or procreation; also for mutual affection, and the
cultivation of those eternal principles of never-ending charity and
benevolence, which are inspired by the Eternal Spirit; also for mutual
comfort and assistance in this world of toil and sorrow, and for
mutual duties towards their offspring.

Marriage, and its duties, are therefore, not a mere matter of choice,
or of convenience, or of pleasure to the parties; but to marry and
multiply is a positive command of Almighty God, binding on all persons
of both sexes, who are circumstanced and conditioned to fulfil the
same. To marry, propagate our species, do our duty to them, and to
educate them in the light of truth, are among the chief objects of our
existence on the earth. To neglect these duties, is to fail to answer
the end of our creation, and is a a very great sin.

While to pervert our natures, and to prostitute ourselves, and our
strength to mere pleasures, or to unlawful communion of the sexes, is
alike subversive of health, of pure, holy and lasting affection; of
moral and social order; and of the laws of God and nature.

If we except murder, there is scarcely a more damning sin on the earth
than the prostitution of female virtue or chastity at the shrine of
pleasure, or brutal lust; or that promiscuous and lawless intercourse
which chills and corrodes the heart, perverts and destroys the pure
affections, cankers and destroys, as it were, the well-springs, the
fountains, or issues of life.

A man who obeys the ordinances of God, and is without blemish or
deformity, who has sound health and mature age, and enjoys liberty and
access to the elements of life; is designed to be the head of a woman,
a father, and a guide of the weaker sex, and of those of tender age,
to mansions of eternal life and salvation.

A woman, under similar circumstances, is designed to be the glory of
some man in the Lord; to be led and governed by him, as her head in
all things, even as Christ is the head of the man; to honour, obey,
love, serve, comfort and help him in all things; to be a happy wife,
and if blessed with offspring, a faithful and affectionate mother,
devoting her life to the joys, cares and duties of her domestic
sphere.

It frequently happens, in the course of human events, that there is,
in a community, a majority of females. In such cases, human laws have
no right to interfere with the divine eternal laws of nature, or of
nature's God, by suffering females to be prostituted to minister to
the wanton pleasures of the lawless, to become the unlawful,
dishonoured mistress, the illegitimate mother, or the wretched outcast
of shame, disease and crime. Nor yet, on the other hand, have human
laws the right to doom a portion of heaven's fair daughters, to single
wretchedness, loneliness and gloom, without the lawful privilege of
becoming honoured wives and mothers.

A wise legislation, or the law of God, would punish, with just
severity, the crimes of adultery or fornication, and would not suffer
the idiot, the confirmed, irreclaimable drunkard, the man of
hereditary disease, or of vicious habits, to possess or retain a wife;
while, at the same time, it would provide for a good and capable
man, to honourably receive and maintain more wives than one. Indeed, it
should be the privilege of every virtuous female, who has the
requisite capacity and qualifications for matrimony; to demand either
of individuals or government, the privilege of becoming an honoured
and legal wife and mother; even if it were necessary for her to be
married to a man who has several wives; or, as Jesus said in the
parable, to take the one talent from the place where it remains
neglected or unimproved, and give it to him who has ten talents.

The false and corrupt institutions, and still more corrupt practices
of "_Christendom_" have had a downward tendency in the generations of
man for many centuries. Our physical organization, health, vigour,
strength of body, intellectual faculties, inclinations, &c., are
influenced very much by parentage. Hereditary disease, idiocy,
weakness of mind, or of constitution, deformity, tendency to violent
and ungovernable passions, vicious appetites and desires, are
engendered by parents; and are bequeathed as a heritage from
generation to generation. Man becomes a murderer, a thief, an
adulterer, a drunkard, a lover of tobacco, opium, or other nauseous or
poisonous drugs, by means of the predisposition, and inclinations
engendered by parentage.

The people before the flood, and also the Sodomites and Canaanites,
had carried these corruptions and degeneracies so far, that God, in
mercy, destroyed them, and thus put an end to the procreation of races
so degenerate and abominable; while Noah, Abraham, Melchesidech, and
others, who were taught in the true laws of procreation, "_were
perfect in their generation_," and trained their children in the same
laws.

The overthrow of those ancient degenerate races is a type of that
which now awaits the nations called "_Christian_," or in other words,
_The great whore of all the earth, for her sins have reached unto
heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities_.

Where is the nation called "_Christian_," that does not uphold or
permit prostitution, fornication and adultery with all their debasing,
demoralizing, degenerating and corroding effects, with all their
tendencies to disease and crime, to operate unchecked, and to leaven
and corrode all classes of society?

Where is the "_Christian nation_" that does not prohibit the law of
God, as given to Abraham and the ancients in relation to marriage?

Where is the "_Christian nation_" that punishes the crime of adultery
and fornication with death, or other heavy penalties?

Where are the institutions which prohibit the marriage of all persons
disqualified by nature, or by vicious habits and practices, to answer
the ends of an institution so holy and pure?

Where are the institutions which would protect, encourage, and honour
the patriarch Jacob, with his four wives and their children?

Where is the community who would feel themselves honoured in
associating with such a family--although, all corrupt practices would
be frowned down, and all persons discountenanced, who, under the name
of gentility, nobility, or royalty, glory in their conquests and
victories over the principles and practices of virtue and innocence?

Echo answers, Where?--unless we look to the far off mountains and
distant vales of Deseret, a land peopled by the Latter-day Saints, and
governed by the law of God, the keys of the eternal Priesthood, and
organized in the New and Everlasting Covenant.

Amid these eternal mountains shall be reared the holy temple of our
God, and all nations shall flow unto it, in order to be taught in His
ways, and to walk in His paths, for out of Zion has gone forth the
law, as predicted by the Prophet Isaiah.[A]

[Footnote A: See the law of God on Marriage, revealed for the
government of the Saints. First published at Great Salt City, Deseret,
1852.]

By this law those distant communities live. There the patriarch of a
hundred children is had in reverence and honour. His virtuous and
honourable wives are considered as mothers in Israel, the daughters of
Abraham and Sarah, and worthy to be numbered with the holy women of
old. And there the daughters of Israel are not prostituted with
impunity. There, the crimes of adultery and fornication are seldom
mentioned, or known to exist. There, no virtuous female is doomed by
law, or custom, to drag out a useless life in the loneliness of the
cloister; the monotonous and sinful pleasures of the Harem; the haunts
of vice and crime; or in the lonely and heartrending gloom and
solitude of a single life.

There, in the holy chambers of the sanctuary, are revealed and
ministered those sacred ordinances, covenants, and sealings, which lay
the foundation of kindred sympathies, associations, and family ties,
indissoluble and eternal. Ties which are stronger than death, more
durable than the ramparts of their snow-clad mountains, and which will
never be dissolved--

    "While life, or thought, or being lasts;
    Or immortality endures."

The restoration of these pure laws and practices has commenced to
improve or regenerate a race. A holy and temperate life; pure morals
and manners; faith, hope, charity; cheerfulness, gentleness,
integrity; intellectual development, pure truth, and knowledge; and
above all, the operations of the Divine Spirit, will produce a race
more beautiful in form and features, stronger, and more vigorous in
constitution, happier in temperament and disposition, more
intellectual, less vicious, and better prepared for long life and good
days in their mortal sojourn.

Each succeeding generation, governed by the same principles, will
still improve, till male and female may live and multiply for a
hundred years upon the earth---

    "And after death in distant spheres,
    The union still renew."

The eternal union of the sexes, in and after the resurrection, is
mainly for the purpose of renewing and continuing the work of
procreation. In our present or rudimental state, our offspring are in
our own image, and partake of our natures, in which are the seeds of
death. In like manner, will the offspring of immortal and celestial
beings, be in the likeness and partake of the nature of their divine
parentage. Hence, such offspring will be pure, holy, incorruptible and
eternal. They will in no wise be subject unto death, except by
descending to partake of the grosser elements, in which are the
inherent properties of dissolution or death.

To descend thus, and to be made subject to sorrow, pain and death, is
the only road to the resurrection, and to the higher degrees of
immortality and eternal life. It is by contrast that intelligences
appreciate and enjoy. How shall the sweet be known without the bitter?
How shall joy be appreciated without sorrow? Or, how shall life be
valued, or its eternal duration appreciated without a contact with its
mortal antagonist--death?

Hence, the highest degrees of eternal felicity are approached by the
straight gate, and the narrow path which leads through the dark valley
of death, to eternal mansions in the realms of endless life. This path
has been trodden by the eternal Father, by His son Jesus Christ,--and
by all the sons and daughters of God, who are exalted to a fulness of
joys celestial.

As has been before remarked, the union of the sexes, in the eternal
world, in the holy covenant of celestial matrimony, is peculiar to the
ordinances and ministrations of the Apostleship, or Priesthood after
the order of the Son of God, or after the order of Melchisedec. The
Aaronic Priesthood, or the institutions peculiar to the law of Moses,
seemed to have recognized no such ordinances or eternal covenants,
hence, the Jewish ordinances of matrimony come to end by death.

Nor did the sects of the Pharisees, Sadducees, or others of that
nation, conceive of anything more lasting than this life, in the
covenants of matrimony. Hence, the Son of God, in answer to the
Sadducees, referred to the order of the angels, in the resurrection,
instead of the order of the gods.

But, the Apostles, holding the keys of the eternal mysteries of God's
kingdom, to seal both on earth and in heaven, understood and
testified, that, "The man is not without the woman, nor the woman
without the man in the Lord."

All persons who attain to the resurrection, and to salvation, without
these eternal ordinances, or sealing covenants, will remain in a
_single state_, in their saved condition, to all eternity, without the
joys of eternal union with the other sex, and consequently without a
crown, without a kingdom, without the power to increase.

Hence, they are angels, and are not gods; and are ministering spirits,
or servants, in the employ and under the direction of THE ROYAL FAMILY
OF HEAVEN--THE PRINCES, KINGS, AND PRIESTS OF ETERNITY.




ERRATA.

Page 13, first line, _for_ "One thousand eight hundred and fifty one,"
_read_ One thousand eight hundred and fifty three.

 "  116, last line, _for_ "here," _read_ there.





End of Project Gutenberg's Key to the Science of Theology, by Parley P. Pratt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEY TO THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY ***

***** This file should be named 35470.txt or 35470.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/4/7/35470/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project,
http://bencrowder.net/books/mtp. Volunteers: Benjamin
Bytheway, Hilton Campbell, Ben Crowder, Meridith Crowder,
Cameron Dixon, Tod Robbins, David Van Leeuwen.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
