Project Gutenberg's Louisiana Beef Cattle, by William Carter Stubbs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Louisiana Beef Cattle

Author: William Carter Stubbs

Release Date: July 7, 2011 [EBook #36645]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOUISIANA BEEF CATTLE ***




Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









[Illustration]




  LOUISIANA
  BEEF
  CATTLE

  WILLIAM CARTER STUBBS, PH.D.

  Formerly Professor of Agriculture
  Louisiana State University and Director of
  State Experiment Stations

  COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY
  THE LOUISIANA COMPANY
  NEW ORLEANS




FOREWORD


The following remarks relative to Louisiana Beef Cattle are proffered
the public to show the marvelous advantages possessed by the alluvial
lands of Louisiana, for the growing of cattle.

An intelligent use of these advantages will bring wealth to the
individual, the State and the Nation.

                                         WILLIAM CARTER STUBBS, PH.D.




[Illustration]




LOUISIANA BEEF CATTLE


The wealth-producing possibilities of cattle-raising are written into
the history, literature and art of every race; and with every
nationality riches have always been counted in cattle and corn.

We find cattle mentioned in the earliest known records of the Hebrews,
Chaldeans and Hindus, and carved on the monuments of Egypt, thousands of
years before the Christian era.

Among the primitive peoples wealth was, and still is, measured by the
size of the cattle herds, whether it be the reindeer of the frigid
North, the camel of the Great Sahara, or herds of whatsoever kind that
are found in every land and in every clime.

The earliest known money, in Ancient Greece, was the image of the ox
stamped on metal; and the Latin word _pecunia_ and our own English
"pecuniary" are derived from _pecus_--cattle.

Although known to the Eastern Hemisphere since the dawn of history,
cattle are not native to the Western Hemisphere, but were introduced
into America during the sixteenth century.

Cortez, Ponce de Leon, De Soto and the other _conquistadores_ from Old
Madrid, who sailed the seas in quest of gold, brought with them to the
New World the monarchs of the bull ring, and introduced the national
sport of Spain into the colonies founded in Peru, Mexico, Florida and
Louisiana.

The long-horned, half-wild herds encountered by the pioneers, and by the
"Forty-niners," who three centuries later trekked across the continent
in quest of gold in California, were descendants of the bull pens of
Mexico City, St. Augustine and New Orleans.

A different type of cattle was brought over to Jamestown, the first
English colony, in the seventeenth century; these were strictly
utilitarian, designed for the triple service of enriching the larder
with dairy products, supplementing the abundant meat supply of buffalo,
deer and other game and providing the ox as the draft animal.

The pioneers, striking out from the Atlantic seaboard, carried with them
their domestic cattle, which were introduced and fostered wherever
settlements were made in their progress across the continent.

It was not until after the Revolutionary War that wealthy planters of
Virginia imported Herefords from England, Jerseys from the Isle of
Jersey, and the flower of other Old World herds.

Even then, extensive breeding of high-grade animals languished for
years, owing to the unprogressive farming methods; and at a later period
on account of the dominancy of the Western cattle ranges.

The public domain of the West and Southwest, owing to the vast areas of
grazing land which cost the cattlemen nothing, became the controlling
factor in the American cattle industry, reaching its climax about 1880.

Subsequently these great feeding grounds were invaded by the
sheep-grower, whose flocks destroyed the pastures and drove out the
cattle wherever they appeared.

The death knell of the national cattle range was sounded by the United
States Government in throwing open the public lands to settlers.

During the romantic period of the cattle outfit--the cowboy with his
bucking broncho, lariat and six-shooter--many of the important cities
and towns of today came into existence as humble adjuncts of the live
stock industry.

There are men living today who have witnessed the beginning, the rise,
and almost the extinction, of the Western cattle range.

A complete revolution has been brought about in the cattle industry
within a lifetime. The change has been a rapid one from the free range
to the fenced pasture; the open ranges turned into farms and
settlements.

With the advent of changed conditions, the rancher of restricted
territory and reduced herds ceased to be an important factor in directly
supplying the market, as he was forced to utilize the land that was not
desirable for homesteaders, and the pasturage being insufficient to
suitably fatten stock, he was compelled to ship his cattle to the
feeders of the Middle West to prepare them for market.

Meanwhile, the Middle West, or corn-belt states, being unable to raise
cattle in an economical way, developed into a feeding station, where
young cattle from the Western ranges were shipped to be fattened and
prepared for the market.

With the decrease of range cattle, year by year, fewer Western beeves
reach the corn belt to be finished and made ready for market.

The early settlers of Southern Louisiana raised cattle after the fashion
that prevailed on the plains of Texas; that is, great herds without care
or attention of any kind increased and multiplied and were annually
rounded up and marketed; the returns were virtually all profit, as the
cattle found their sustenance entirely in the luxuriant natural
pasturage.

With the change of conditions in the cattle-growing world, Louisiana
began the improvement of its herds, so that today there are thousands
of highly bred cattle in the state, equal to the best that can be found
anywhere.

In a consideration of any branch of the live stock industry, a review of
the world-wide conditions becomes necessary to establish a standard of
comparison between the industry in a given locality as against all other
localities, and such a review at the present time shows an international
shortage of beef cattle that even threatens famine.

The day of nondescript cattle of inferior quality is rapidly passing.
Through breeding, they are being steadily supplanted by higher grade,
perfectly developed animals which yield the proper proportions of lean
and fat, whose meat is tender, nutritious and palatable.

The Old World breeds have been improved and perfected, through the skill
of the American grower, until American stock has become the standard of
the whole world, from the standpoint of excellence in every particular.

There are a multitude of reasons why it will never be possible for the
growers of the Eastern Hemisphere, with the exception of Great Britain
and the Scandinavian countries, to successfully compete with the United
States in bringing the standard of their beef cattle up to the high
point already attained in this country.

No longer ago than ten years, cattle were not acceptable as collateral
except by banks in the Western cattle centers.

Today, cattle are standard collateral for loans, approved by the
Treasury of the United States Government and acceptable everywhere, as
cattle are as good as gold all over the world; and a cattle enterprise
managed with ability and integrity is the safest business known.

There are diseases to which cattle are subject; but these, like the
diseases to which mankind is subject, are now controlled by science, and
can be quickly eradicated, even though a foothold is once gained; and
that a foothold should be gained at all is as much beyond the bounds of
reason as that the cities of New York and Chicago should, in this
advanced age, be devastated by a scourge of cholera, smallpox, yellow
fever, or what not.

According to official estimates of the United States Government, in 1910
there were 41,178,000 head of beef cattle in the United States, having a
value of $785,261,000, while on January 1, 1917, there were 40,849,000
head of beef cattle, having a value of $1,465,786,000; a decrease in
supply, but an increase in value, within seven years, of 86.66 per cent.

In addition to superior natural conditions, the United States, on
account of the great distance to other countries where cattle can be
raised successfully, is protected against competition, at all times and
under all conditions.

The United States for a quarter of a century was the world's greatest
export nation, and this trade has fallen off only in recent times,
because of the shortage at home.

Our export business well illustrates the changing conditions in the
cattle industry, and the record of live cattle exported from Chicago is
a notable example, namely:

                                Cattle
  Exports in 1905               321,301
  Exports in 1912                23,006
  Exports in 1913                   260
  Exports in 1914                   182

This table shows that the export trade was virtually extinct a year
before the European War began; and if revived, it will be because of
exorbitant prices brought about by the abnormal European demand, due to
the depletion of the cattle herds abroad.

Official statistics show that prior to the European War 90.55 per cent
of all the European cattle were within the boundaries of the
now-belligerent countries.

The records at that time, covering both beef cattle and dairy-herds,
were as follows:

  Russia                        36,237,000
  Germany                       20,944,000
  Austria-Hungary               17,787,883
  France                        12,286,849
  United Kingdom                12,030,789
  Turkey                         6,726,000
  Italy                          6,198,861
  Rumania                        2,667,000
  Belgium                        1,831,000

Even prior to the war, the world-supply of cattle was diminishing, and
now the herds of these nations, representing nine-tenths of the European
supply, are depleted as never before, while the one-tenth remaining
supply of the neighboring neutral nations is reduced by the drafts of
the warring powers.

The immense demand in recent years has caused the marketing of vast
numbers of the best improved cattle in the United States, including
great inroads upon the breeding herds, as cattle growers have marketed
their stock without regard to the future, looking solely to the large
immediate profits.

The depletion and deterioration of the breeding herds is a source of
great danger, as it cannot fail to result in a still further decrease in
production, and threatens to seriously impair the meat supply of the
American people.

As an infinitely worse condition prevails in the other cattle-producing
countries of the world, it is obvious that we cannot look to any
outside source of supply, either to replenish our herds, or to provide
our meat food requirements.

The increased cost of production in the North has resulted in the great
advancement of the dairying industry, to meet the American food
requirements.

In 1850 the milch cows on American farms numbered about 6,000,000. This
number was increased to 8,500,000 in 1860, and to about 13,000,000 in
1880; and the census of 1900 showed 17,100,000. In 1907, they numbered
20,625,000, and January 1, 1917, 22,768,000, or more than one-third of
our entire cattle herds.

The change from beef-cattle raising to dairying is most noticeable in
the Eastern and the North Central States, where the lack of pasturage
and the increased cost of forage make the production of beef less
profitable than formerly, while the proximity to large centers of
population and great cities has greatly stimulated the demand for dairy
products.

In some sections of the country dairying has encroached to such an
extent on the beef cattle industry that the latter has ceased to be a
factor of importance in those localities.

The beef cattle industry of the North is divided into two departments:
first, producing in the Far West; second, preparing for market in the
Middle West.

The Western producer can only provide grazing, and must then ship to the
Middle West feeder, who raises the corn with which he prepares the
cattle for market.

The shortness of the grazing season makes it impossible to put a
thousand-pound beef on the market in a year; consequently the stock must
be shipped to the Middle West in September, October or November, to be
fattened and prepared for the market.

The breeding herds and the stock not ready for shipment to the feeders
of the Middle West exist on the thin grasses, through eight
months--from September to June.

These sections of arid soil and thin vegetation are further handicapped
by the winters of intense cold, and of enforced housing and feeding;
for, during six or seven months, and even eight months, of each year,
there is scant vegetation to support animal life, and the struggle is a
severe one to sustain life itself against the encroachments of the
bitter temperature which so long prevails.

If the Middle West farmer should go into cattle-raising, his position
would be almost identical with that of the cattle grower of the Far
West, as his pasturage would be exhausted in October, and it would be
necessary to feed the cattle until May; otherwise, his loss would be
tremendous through partial starvation and exposure to inclement weather,
and he could not count upon the survival of more than 75 per cent of his
herd from one pasturing season to the next.

The farmer of the Middle West has six months of open weather, which must
be devoted exclusively to planting, cultivating and harvesting his corn
crop, and this crop takes up his land, leaving no acreage available for
summer pasturage.

He produces corn in the summer, and begins feeding in the fall.
According to the quality of cattle received from the Far West, he feeds
60, 90, and up to 120 days, when they are ready for market, and,
according to the old saying, are "corn sold on the hoof."

Even the adoption of intensive methods does not enable the Northern
grower to successfully compete with the Southern grower, because
production in the North is limited to one-half the year, and the other
half is wholly unproductive, during which period his stores are being
consumed, without any returns whatever.

To house cattle during the winter is scarcely better than to leave them
exposed to the rigors of climate, as confinement brings the scourge of
tuberculosis; whereas in the South, and wherever life is spent in the
open, cattle enjoy immunity from this plague.

Furthermore, the year-round supply of green food in the South is
naturally conducive to the health and well-being of all animals, whereas
in the North, for several months in the year, only concentrated food is
available.

"The South, with her short, mild winters, and her abundance of grasses,
can grow young cattle cheaper than the North."--W. J. Spillman, Chief of
the Bureau of Farm Management, United States Department of Agriculture.

A mild climate, luxuriant pastures, a great variety of forage crops, a
year-round supply of green food, and living outdoors all the year, are
the factors that make Southern Louisiana the ideal cattle-raising
section of the United States.

James Wilson, former Secretary of the United States Department of
Agriculture, at the National Live Stock Show held in New Orleans in
1916, said:

"You have as fine domestic animals in the State of Louisiana today as
you will find anywhere; the finest breeds of cattle--Holstein and
others, as well as American breeds of Herefords, which are an
improvement over the English Hereford."

In the corn belt the lands are not so productive in grains and pasture
crops as the alluvial lands of Louisiana.

In the North the growing season for crops does not exceed six months; in
Louisiana the productive period is twelve months.

In Northern states, animals can be pastured in the fields during six or
seven months only; in Louisiana the animals may pasture in the open the
whole year.

In the North, extensive and costly barns and equipment are essential for
winter shelter and feeding, and vast quantities of grain, hay, ensilage,
and other foods, must be raised and stored, as the period of
winter-feeding extends over six months; in Louisiana, open sheds facing
south provide all the shelter needed, as aside from cold rains at
intervals during February or March, there are no rigors of climate.

Careful estimates by farm experts, and by authorities on cattle, place
the cost of production in Louisiana at less than 60 per cent of the cost
in the most favored corn-belt states.

There is no winter here, as understood in the North. Frost is a rarity,
frequently being absent for several years, and is never severe; the
rainfall is well distributed and averages 60 inches a year; extremes of
temperature are very rare; the average for January is 59 degrees, and
for July, 82 degrees, over the Gulf Coast area of Southern Louisiana;
and vegetation flourishes the year round.

The cost of summer feeding in Southern Louisiana, as compared with
summer feeding in the corn-belt states, shows a difference of about 25
per cent in favor of the former.

In winter feeding, the difference is altogether in favor of Louisiana.
Furthermore, practically none of the food consumed here is required to
keep up the animal heat, whereas 30 per cent of the food given Northern
cattle during the winter is absorbed by this requirement alone.

According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the cost of
ensilage in the Northern states ranges from $1.50 to $4 per ton, and it
is generally conceded that corn ensilage in the Middle West costs an
average of $2.50 per ton.

On the alluvial lands of Southern Louisiana it has been proved that
ensilage can be produced at 50 cents to $1.50 per ton, and the yield
per acre is two crops of ten to twenty tons each, as against one crop of
five to ten tons in the North.

According to the Bureau of Plant Industry, the best bluegrass pastures
of the North will carry only one head of cattle to two acres for about
six months of the year; whereas on the alluvial lands of Louisiana,
Bermuda grass and lespedeza combined forms permanent pasture which will
carry several head of cattle ten months on a single acre.

With a network of waterways and railroads, nearer the great consuming
markets of the East than any other important cattle-growing section, and
but a short distance from Chicago and the important markets of the
Middle States, Southern Louisiana occupies a strategic commercial
position of great money-value to those who raise cattle, as well as
other products.

Out of six thousand members of the American Hereford Society, a grower
from the Gulf Coast took the greatest number of prizes for a herd of
Hereford cattle, and also took the grand championship prize for a
Hereford bull, against the whole of the United States, which shows the
merit of this section of country.

The market today requires quality, and experience has proved that the
greatest profit comes through producing quality.

The day of the inferior, lightweight animal, which was marketed at two
to three and one-half years old, has passed.

The requirement now is for high-grade, one-year-old stock, weighing an
average of 1,000 pounds.

This stock can be produced in Louisiana under organized methods, at a
cost of 4½ cents per pound, delivered at the market, and will bring a
price of 10 cents per pound.

Prior to the Civil War the best talent in America was devoted to
agricultural pursuits, which offered the greatest opportunity for making
large wealth--as wealth was counted in those days.

Afterward came the manufacturing era, which attracted the genius of the
country and brought about the perfection of methods and combinations in
almost every known line, with the result that no longer is there any
general field of opportunity therein.

Another era has now arrived, which again focuses the minds of thinking
men upon the greatest of all problems--supplying the human race with
food--because of the imperative need of increasing the world's food
supply, and because of the large profit therein.

In the United States today, the production of live stock is the greatest
field of opportunity open to men of brains and capital; and it is, above
all, the one industry that now attracts the genius of men of large
affairs, and the great aggregations of capital.

In 1895 the average price of beef cattle in the principal markets of
this country was $4.40 per hundredweight; in 1900, it had increased to
$5.80; in 1907 the average was $7.60; in 1910, $8.85; in 1911, $9.35; in
1912, $10.25; in 1915, $11.60; and in 1916, about $11.90 per
hundredweight.

The foregoing market prices tell the story of the cattle industry from a
financial standpoint.

The following prices paid in 1901 and in 1916 for prize-winning
exhibition beeves--at the International Live Stock Exposition held
annually in Chicago, at the Union Stock Yards--well illustrate the trend
of the cattle market:

In 1901, the Grand Champion carload of fat cattle was two-year-old
stock, weighing an average of 1,497 pounds, and sold in the auction ring
at $12 per hundredweight.

In 1916, the Grand Champion carload of fat cattle was one-year-old
stock, weighing an average of 1,146 pounds, and sold in the auction ring
at $28 per hundredweight.

In 1901, the Grand Champion Steer was two years old, weighed 1,600
pounds, and sold in the auction ring at 50 cents per pound.

In 1916, the Grand Champion Steer was one year old, weighed 1,120
pounds, and sold in the auction ring at $1.75 per pound.

The following top prices were paid in the auction ring of the Exposition
for "show cattle" of various weights:

    Cattle Weighing      Price in    Per Hundredweight

   900 to 1050 pounds      1901          $ 8.70
   900 to 1050 pounds      1916           17.75
  1050 to 1200 pounds      1901            9.50
  1050 to 1200 pounds      1916           28.00
  1200 to 1350 pounds      1901            8.75
  1200 to 1350 pounds      1916           20.00
  1350 to 1500 pounds      1901           12.00
  1350 to 1500 pounds      1916           18.50
  1500 to 1900 pounds      1901            9.30
  1500 to 1900 pounds      1916           15.75




[Illustration]




Transcriber's Notes:


  Text in italics is enclosed with underscores: _italics_.





End of Project Gutenberg's Louisiana Beef Cattle, by William Carter Stubbs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOUISIANA BEEF CATTLE ***

***** This file should be named 36645-8.txt or 36645-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/4/36645/

Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
