The Project Gutenberg EBook of Knitting, Crochet, and Netting, with Twelve
Illustrations, by Éléonore Riego de la Branchardière

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Knitting, Crochet, and Netting, with Twelve Illustrations

Author: Éléonore Riego de la Branchardière

Release Date: July 9, 2011 [EBook #36669]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNITTING, CROCHET, NETTING ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)





Transcriber's Note

The illustrations were originally located after the table of contents.
They have been moved to follow the patterns that they illustrate.
Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. A list of corrections
is found at the end of the text. The corrections listed on the errata
page have been made in the text.




  KNITTING,
  CROCHET, AND NETTING,

  WITH
  TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS.

  BY

  M^LLE. RIEGO
  DE LA BRANCHARDIERE,

  Teacher of Fancy Works.

  LONDON:
  PUBLISHED BY S. KNIGHTS,
  6, 'Change Alley, Cornhill.
  1846.

  [_Registered at Stationers' Hall._]

  PRICE 2s. 6d.




  Printed by Kelly & Pritchett, 32, Houndsditch, London.




  TO LADY MARTINS,

  THIS LITTLE WORK IS HUMBLY DEDICATED,

  WITH HER KIND PERMISSION,

  BY THE AUTHORESS.




PREFACE


The Authoress, having had much experience in teaching, and always
writing her own directions, has been induced to publish this little
Volume for the use of her pupils; and as all the receipts have been
tried, she can with confidence answer for their accuracy. Should any
further instructions be required, she will wait upon any Lady, who will
apply at S. KNIGHTS, 6, 'Change Alley, Cornhill; HOWELL and JAMES,
Regent Street; and at all the principal Berlin shops.




CONTENTS.


  KNITTING.                           PAGE

  Terms used in Knitting                 1

  Manchette or Undersleeves              3

  Vandyke Edging                         4

  Taie D'Oreiller                        5

  Davidoff Cap                           6

  Twelve D'Oyleys:--
    Rosette Pattern                      8
    Pique Pattern                        9
    Chenee Pattern                      10
    Eglantier Pattern                   11
    Tablette Pattern                    12
    Plume Pattern                       12
    Mimosa Pattern                      13
    Lattice Pattern                     15
    Lady Bruce's Pattern                16
    Festoon Pattern                     17
    Target Pattern                      17
    Arabesque Pattern                   18

  Knitted Purse                         19

  Anti Macassar                         19

  Shetland Shawl                        21

  Vandyke Edging                        25

  Turkish Pattern Muff                  26

  Pelerine                              27

  Foot Muff                             29

  Driving Mitts                         31

  Point Lace Edging                     32

  Scollop Edging                        35

  Diamond Edging                        37

  Treble Diamond Edging                 38

  Fringe for D'Oyleys                   39

  Travelling Cap                        39

  Shetland Scarf                        40

  Petit Point Quilt or Table Cover      41

  Border for Quilt                      42

  Baby's Socks                          42

  Square Shawl                          44

  Border for Shawl                      45

  Polka                                 46

  Child's Frock                         49

  Carriage Mat                          51

  Réseau Quilt                          52

  Fringe for Quilt                      53


  CROCHET.

  Terms used in Crochet                 55

  Shepherd's Crochet                    57

  Double Crochet                        57

  Treble Crochet                        58

  Crochet In two colors                 58

  Six Round D'Oyleys:--
    Diamond Pattern                     59
    Damier Pattern                      60
    Trellis Pattern                     61
    Filet Pattern                       62
    Scollop Pattern                     63
    Seme Pattern                        64

  Fringe for D'Oyleys                   65

  Scollop for D'Oyleys                  65

  Wheel Pattern Insertion               65

  Ecaille Pattern Edging                66

  Open Vandyke Edging                   66

  Close Vandyke Edging                  67

  Double Scollop Edging                 68

  Diamond Insertion                     68

  Cuffs, Diamond Pattern                69

  Edge for Cuffs                        70

  Crochet Collar                        70

  Round Sofa Pillow                     71

  Bead Crochet                          72

  Handsome Bead Purse                   72

  Bead Purse                            73

  Table Cover in Squares                73

  Bell Pulls                            74

  Greek Cap                             75

  Card Case                             77

  Bag                                   78

  Square Sofa Pillow                    79

  Half-square Shawl                     80

  Another Shawl                         81

  Crochet Shoes                         81

  Sole for Shoes                        82

  Crochet Open Purse                    82

  Shamrock Purse                        83

  Honey Comb Edging                     83

  Anti-Macassar                         84

  Travelling Bag                        85

  Table Cover                           86

  A Chain                               87

  Cap                                   88


  NETTING.

  Anti-Macassar                         89

  D'Oyley                               90

  Bread Basket D'Oyley                  90

  Netted Purse                          90

  Purse for a Lady                      91

  Bead Purse                            91

  Wedding Purse with Motto              92

  Plain Purse with Motto                93





TERMS USED IN KNITTING.


_Cast on_--Make a loop on 1 pin, and with the other pin knit a plain
   stitch without taking it off, pass it on to the left pin and repeat.

_Cast off_--Knit 2 stitches, pass the 1st stitch knitted over the 2nd,
   knit 1, turn the 2nd stitch over the last, and repeat to the end;
   then cut off the cotton and draw it through to fasten it.

The 1st stitch of every row should be slipped.

To make round after casting on 3 pins with the 4th pin, knit the 1st
   stitch cast on.

_In purling a row_, the wool should be in front of the pin. When there
   are purl and plain stitches in a row, bring the cotton forward to
   purl, and pass it back before knitting the plain stitch.

_To knit 3 together_--Slip a stitch, knit 2 together, turn the slipped
   stitch over them, leaving but 1 stitch.

_A slipped stitch_ should always be taken off the purl way.

_To purl_, is to put the pin the contrary way to knitting plain; in
   knitting, the pin is put up the stitch, in purling it is put down.

When this mark (*) occurs in a row, the stitches before it are not to be
   repeated in the row, being merely the edge stitches to prevent the
   work from decreasing; thus, when knit 3 together is in a row, the row
   generally begins with knit 2 together, and ends the same.

_The stitch over_ in many of the patterns, is always knitted as the 1st
   stitch, as many patterns end with make 1, it could not be done
   without this stitch.

Many ladies in working a pattern, copy on cards each row separately;
   this prevents confusing one row with another.

The stitches between the mark, thus (knit 2 together 3 times) are
   worked, knit 2 together, knit 2 together, knit 2 together; this
   prevents useless repetition.

The pins and meshes are all gauged by the standard or wire-drawer's
   gauge.

_To raise stitches_--Put the pin in the selvedge or side of the
   knitting, put the wool round the pin as in knitting, and bring it
   through, so as to form a stitch.

_To make a stitch_--Bring the wool forward between the needles.




KNITTING.


Manchette or Undersleeves.

_In 2 colors of Berlin wool._

_Pins 19, 17, 11, 1 pair of each, with the colored wool cast on with 19
   pins, 66 stitches._

1st row--Purl 1, knit 1.

2nd row--Knit 1, purl 1.

Repeat these 2 rows 4 times more, making in all 10 rows, then join on
the white wool, and with No. 11 pins, knit 1 plain row.

12th row--Make 1, knit 2 together.

Repeat the last 2 rows 11 times more, making in all 24 of white; then
the color, with No. 17 pins, knit the first 10 rows, join on white, with
No. 11 pins, knit the 24 rows of white as before; then with colored
wool, No. 17 pins, knit the first 10 rows and cast off; finish at the
commencement with vandyke edge as follows.


Vandyke Edging.

_Pins No. 11, white wool, cast on 6 stitches._

1st row--Slip 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 2, knit 2
together.

2nd row--Make 1, knit 2, purl 1, knit 4.

3rd row--Slip 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 4.

4th row--Plain.

5th row--Slip 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 2, knit 2
together, make 2, knit 2 together.

6th row--Slip 1, knit 1, purl 1, knit 2, purl 1, knit 4.

7th row--Slip 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 6.

8th row--Cast off all but 6 stitches, knit them plain, and commence at
1st row.

For each sleeve 10 Vandykes are required.

_To make 2 stitches is to put the wool twice round the pin._


Taie D'Oreiller.

_In Shetland Wool._

_This pillow is lined with pink or blue satin._

_Pins 8, cast on 89 stitches, or 12 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 2 together, * knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1,
knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, knit 3 together, repeat
from mark; at the end of this row, make 1, knit 2 together.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Knit 2 together, * knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1,
knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 3 together.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 5,
make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3 together.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, knit 3
together, knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1.

8th row--Purl.

9th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 3
together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1.

10th row--Purl.

11th row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3 together, make
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2.

12th row--Purl.

Work until square, and finish with a vandyke edge in the same wool, and
No. 10 pins.


The Davidoff Cap.

_Border white with black spots, middle violet or scarlet, pins No. 8,
   Berlin wool, cast on 116 stitches._

With white knit 4 rows plain.

5th row--Black and white, knit 1 black stitch and 3 white.

6th row--3 white, bring the white forward, pass the black to the back,
knit 1, bring the black forward, pass the white to the back, repeat,
knit 4 rows plain of white.

11th row--Black and white, knit 2 white, and repeat the 5th row.

12th row--1 white, bring the wool forward, pass the black to the back,
knit 1, bring the black forward, pass the white to the back, and repeat
the 6th row; repeat from 1st row once more; this finishes the border.
With violet wool begin at the other end of the pins.

1st row--Make 1, knit 2 together.

2nd and 3rd rows--Plain.

4th row--Purl.

Repeat these 4 rows, knitting 2 together at the beginning of every row,
12 times; cast off. With white wool, raise 120 stitches round the
violet, to form the border at the back, and knit the same as the first
pattern.

Cast off, and finish with ribbon, or cord, and tassels to match.


Set of Twelve D'Oyleys,

_These patterns are suited for Anti-Macassars, Bread D'Oyleys, Shawls,
&c._

_Pins No. 18, Cotton No. 14._


ROSETTE PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 8 for each pattern, and 1 at the end._

1st row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1, repeat, at end of row knit 1 more.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2
together.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 2.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 3, knit 2 together, make
1.

8th row--Purl.

9th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 1.

10th row--Purl.

11th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 5, make 1, knit 3 together,
repeat from mark; at the end of the row make 1, knit 2 together.

12th row--Purl


PIQUE PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 8 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1, at the end of row knit 1.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2
together.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, knit 2, make 1, knit
1.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1,
knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 3 together, repeat from mark, at
end of row make 1, knit 2 together.

8th row--Purl.


CHENEE PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 6 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, at end of row knit 1.

2nd row--Make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together.

3rd row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together.

4th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together, at
the end of row make 1, knit 2 together.

5th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1.

6th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3 together, make
1.

7th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1.

8th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1.


EGLANTIER PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 8 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 2 together, * knit 2, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2, knit
3 together, repeat from mark, at end of these rows knit 2 together.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Knit 2 together, * knit 1, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 1, knit
3 together, repeat from mark.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 5, make 1, knit 3 together,
repeat from mark.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2, knit 3 together, knit 2, make 1.

8th row--Purl.

9th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 1, knit 3 together, knit 1, make 1, knit
1.

10th row--Purl.

11th row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 2.

12th row--Purl.


TABLETTE PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 6 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together,
repeat from mark, at end of row make 1, knit 2 together.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1.

4th row--Plain; repeat the 2 last rows twice more, in all 6 rows.

9th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1.

10th row--Plain.

11th row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together.

12th row--Plain.

Repeat the 2 last rows twice more, and commence at 1st row.


PLUME PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 8 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 2 together, * knit 2, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2, knit
3 together, repeat from mark; at the end of the row knit 2 together.

2nd row--Purl; repeat these 2 rows twice more.

7th row--Knit 2 together, * knit 1, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 1, knit
3 together; repeat from mark.

8th row--Purl.

9th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 5, make 1, knit 3 together.

10th, 11th, and 12th rows--Plain.

13th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2, knit 3 together, knit 2, make 1.

14th row--Purl; repeat the 2 last rows twice more.

19th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 1, knit 3 together, knit 1, make 1, knit
1.

20th row--Purl.

21st row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 2.

22nd, 23rd, and 24th rows--Plain.


MIMOSA PATTERN.

_Cast on 72 stitches, or 14 for each pattern, and 2 over._

1st row--Purl 2, knit 3 together, knit 6, purl 2, make 1, knit 1, make
1; at the end of row purl 2.

2nd row--Knit 2, purl 3, knit 2, purl 7; at end of row knit 2.

3rd row--Purl 2, knit 3 together, knit 4, purl 2, knit 1, make 1, knit
1, make 1, knit 1.

4th row--Knit 2, purl 5.

5th row--Purl 2, knit 3 together, knit 2, purl 2, knit 2, make 1, knit
1, make 1, knit 2.

6th row--Knit 2, purl 7, knit 2, purl 3.

7th row--Purl 2, knit 3 together, purl 2, knit 3, make 1, knit 1, make
1, knit 3.

8th row--Knit 2, purl 9, knit 2, purl 1.

9th row--Purl 2, make 1, knit 1, make 1, purl 2, knit 3 together, knit
6.

10th row--Knit 2, purl 7, knit 2, purl 3.

11th row--Purl 2, knit 1, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 1, purl 2, knit 3
together, knit 4.

12th row--Knit 2, purl 5.

13th row--Purl 2, knit 2, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2, purl 2, knit 3
together, knit 2.

14th row--Knit 2, purl 3, knit 2, purl 7.

15th row--Purl 2, knit 3, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 3, purl 2, knit 3
together.

16th row--Knit 2, purl 1, knit 2, purl 9.


LATTICE PATTERN.

_Cast on 72 stitches, or 8 for each pattern._

1st row--Knit 1, (make 1, knit 2 together twice,) knit 3.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together twice,) knit 2.

4th row--Plain.

5th row--Knit 3, (make 1, knit 2 together twice,) knit 1.

6th row--Plain.

7th row--Knit 4, (make 1, knit 2 together twice.)

8th row--Plain.

9th row--Knit 2, (knit 2 together, make 1 twice,) knit 2.

10th row--Plain.

11th row--Knit 1, (knit 2 together, make 1 twice,) knit 3.

12th row--Plain.

13th row--(Knit 2 together, make 1 twice,) knit 4.

14th row--Plain.


LADY BRUCE'S PATTERN.

_Cast on 74 stitches, or 10 for each pattern, and 4 over._

1st row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1; at end of row knit 4, beside
the pattern.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2
together, make 1, knit 2 together; at end of row knit 4.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 5, make 1, knit 2 together,
make 1, knit 3 together, repeat from mark; at end of row instead of
knitting 3 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 3.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 3, knit 2 together, make 1, knit
2 together, make 1, knit 1; at end of row knit 2 together, knit 2.

8th row--Purl.

9th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2; at end of row knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1.

10th row--Purl.

11th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 3; at end of row knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together.

12th row--Purl.


FESTOON PATTERN.

_Cast on 72 stitches, or 12 for each pattern._

1st row--Purl 1, (knit 2 together twice,) (make 1, knit 1, 3 times,)
make 1, (knit 2 together twice.)

2nd row--Purl 11, knit 1.


TARGET PATTERN.

_Cast on 73 stitches, or 6 for each pattern, and 1 over._

1st row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1; at end of row
knit 1 plain.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together;
repeat from mark at end of row, make 1, knit 2 together.

4th row--Plain.


ARABESQUE PATTERN.

_Cast on 69 stitches, or 13 for each pattern, and 4 over._

1st row--knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, knit 3
together, knit 3, make 1; knit the last 4 stitches the same as 1st 4
every row.

2nd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, purl 1, make 1, purl 2, purl 3
together, purl 2, make 1, purl 1.

3rd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2, make 1, knit 1, knit 3
together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2.

4th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, purl 3, make 1, purl 3
together, make 1, purl 3.

Finish them with fringe or scollop edging.


Knitted Purse.

_Pins No. 18, coarse netting silk No. 6, steel beads, thread the beads
   on the silk, cast on 61 stitches._

1st row--Make 1, knit 2 together; at end of row knit 1 plain.

2nd row--Make 1, slip 2 beads down close to the pin, knit 2 together; at
end of row knit 1 plain.

Repeat these 2 rows until there are 8 inches cast off, and sew up 2-3/4
inches on each side, leaving 2-1/2 inches for the opening.

The long bead tassels suit this purse best.


Anti-Macassar

_Pins No. 12, cotton No. 12, cast on 118 stitches, or 19 for each
   pattern._

1st row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2
together, purl 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, purl 1, knit 1, knit 2
together, purl 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1; at the end of every
row knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together.

2nd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, purl 3, knit 1, purl 2, knit
1, purl 2, knit 1, purl 3.

3rd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, (knit
2 together, purl 1, 3 times,) knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1.

4th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, purl 4, knit 1, purl 1, knit
1, purl 1, knit 1, purl 4.

5th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 3
together, purl 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1.

6th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, purl 6, knit 1, purl 6.

7th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 5, make 1, knit 3
together, make 1, knit 5, make 1.

8th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, purl 15; finish with fringe.


Shetland Shawl.

_This shawl may be worked with a colored border._

_Diamond border and leaf pattern middle. Pins No. 6, cast on 336
   stitches._

BORDER.

1st row--Knit 5, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 6.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Knit 4, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 5.

4th row--Plain.

5th row--Knit 3, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 4.

6th row--Plain.

7th row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together,
knit 3.

8th row--Plain.

9th row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together,
knit 2.

10th row--Plain.

11th row--Knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1,
make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

12th row--Plain.

13th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 3.

14th row--Plain.

15th row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 3
together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 4.

16th row--Plain.

17th row--Knit 4, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 3, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 5.

18th row--Plain.

19th row--Knit 5, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 6.

20th row--Plain.

21st row--Knit 6, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 7.

22nd row--Plain.

Repeat this pattern once more, then with a needle and thread, take 32
stitches off the pin; these stitches are to be left for the side border.
With the white wool knit 272 stitches plain, leaving 32 stitches for the
other side; fasten them, and commence the

MIDDLE.

1st row--Slip 1, knit 1, turn the slipped stitch over the knitted 1,
knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, make 1, knit 2, knit 2 together.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Slip 1, knit 1, turn the slipped stitch over it, knit 1, make
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1,
knit 1, knit 2 together.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Slip 1, knit 1, turn over, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1,
knit 5, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Knit 1, * make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, knit 2
together, knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together;
repeat from mark.

8th row--Purl.

9th row--Knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, knit 2
together, slip 1, knit 1, turn over, knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together,
make 1.

10th row--Purl.

11th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2
together, slip 1, knit 1, turn over, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together,
make 1, knit 1.

12th row--Purl.

13th row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, slip
1, knit 1, turn over, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2.

14th row--Purl.

15th row--Knit 2 together, knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together, 3 times,)
make 1, knit 3.

16th row--Purl.

Repeat this pattern until the middle is square; then knit the sides the
same as the first pattern, until the same length as the middle, sew
them to it, and put all the stitches on 1 pin; then knit the border the
same as commencement. Finish with the following fringe.


Vandyke fringe for Shetland Shawl.

_Pins No. 9, cast on 11 stitches._

1st row--Make 1, knit 2 together 5 times, make 1, knit 1.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Make 1, knit 2 together 5 times, make 1, knit 2.

4th row--Plain.

5th row--Make 1, knit 2 together 5 times, make 1, knit 3.

6th row--Plain.

Repeat the 2 last rows until there are 9 plain stitches.

19th row--Knit 2 together, make 1, 5 times, knit 2 together, knit 8.

20th row--Plain.

21st row--Knit 2 together, make 1, 5 times, knit 2 together, knit 7.

22nd row--Plain.

Repeat these 2 rows until there are 11 on the pin, then repeat from 1st
row; when sufficient is made in the plain row, cast off 7 stitches,
leaving 4 to be pulled out for the fringe.


Turkish Pattern for a Muff.

_Double Berlin wool, 2 colors, black and gold._

_Pins No. 11, cast on 28 stitches on each of 3 pins._

1st round--Gold color, leaving the wool in front of pin, slip 1, pass
the wool round the pin so as to bring it in front, purl 2 together.

2nd round--Black, knit 1, (this is a black stitch,) slip 1, (a gold
loop,) knit 1.

3rd round--Same as 2nd; at the end of this round, take the last stitch
off the right hand pin, and put it on the left; repeat from 1st round.


Pelerine.

_Double Berlin wool, scarlet or blue middle, white and black border, in
   imitation of Minerva, pins No. 6, cast on 8 stitches with scarlet._

1st row--Slip 1, knit 1, * make 1, knit 2, repeat from mark.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Slip 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2, make 1, slip 1, knit 2, turn
the slipped stitch over the 2 knitted, (make 1, knit 2 twice.)

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Slip 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2; these are the edge stitches,
and therefore not repeated in the row. Make 1, slip 1, knit 2, turn the
slipped stitch over, and repeat until the last 4 stitches; then make 1,
knit 2 twice.

Repeat the last 2 rows, until there are 120 stitches on the pin, knit a
purl row, next row knit the edge stitches and 15 patterns, (or 50
stitches); cast off 24 stitches, and, with another pin, finish the row.
This finishes the back.

The ends are then decreased in the following manner:

The wool is now at the left side, leave the 50 stitches on the other
pin, and work the other 50, thus:

1st row--Purl, at the end of row purl 2 together.

2nd row--Slip 1, knit 2, turn over, repeat the pattern to the end.

3rd row--As 1st.

4th row--The same as 2nd; at the end make 1, knit 1.

Repeat these 4 rows until there are but 3 stitches, cast off, and
commence the other side.

1st row--Purl 2 together, purl the rest.

2nd row--Commence with pattern.

3rd row--Same as first.

4th row--Knit 2 together, and repeat pattern.

Repeat these 4 rows until finished.

For the border, white wool, raise 180 stitches from the outside
selvedge.

1st row--Make 1, purl 2, repeat.

2nd row--Pattern.

3rd row--Purl.

4th row--Pattern.

5th row--Purl.

6th row--Pattern.

7th row--Make 1, purl 6.

8th row--Make 1, slip 1, knit 2, turn over, make 1, slip 1, knit 3, turn
over, repeat.

9th row--Purl.

10th row--Same as 8th.

11th row--Purl, cast off.

Raise 120 stitches, with white, on the wrong side, round the neck, and
work as the white border. For the tufts, cut black wool in pieces of
1-1/2 inch, take 3 pieces, and sew them alternately on the border.


Plaid Foot Muff.

_Scarlet, dark blue, and green 4-thread fleecy._

_Pins No. 8, cast on 108 stitches in scarlet._

1st row--Plain.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Green, purl.

4th row--Blue, slip 2, knit 4.

5th row--Blue, purl 4, slip 2.

6th row--Blue, slip 2, purl 4.

7th row--Blue, purl 4, slip 2.

8th row--Green, plain.

9th row--Scarlet, purl.

10th row--Scarlet, purl.

11th row--Scarlet, plain.

12th row--Green, purl.

13th row--Blue, knit 3, slip 2, knit 1.

14th row--Blue, purl 1, slip 2, purl 3.

15th row--Same as 13th.

16th row--Same as 14th.

17th row--Green, plain.

18th row--Scarlet, plain.

Repeat until square, cast off. For the side, cast on 24 stitches, and
knit sufficient to go round 3 sides of the square.

FOR THE LINING.

With white wool, cast 102 stitches; make 1, slip 1, knit 2 together,
repeat until square; work 2 pieces. Cut 2 pieces of mill board the size
of the square, and 1 for the side; stretch the work on 1, and cover the
other with cloth, stuffed with fine combed wool, and finish with roleau
and cord.


Driving Mitts.

_4 Pins No. 15, 4-thread fleecy, cast on 18 stitches on each of 2 pins,
   and 20 on the 3rd._

1st round--Knit 2, purl 2, for 20 rounds.

21st round--Plain.

22nd round--Purl 1, knit 3.

23rd round--Plain.

24th round--Knit 2, purl 1, knit 1.

The last 4 rounds form the pattern, and are worked throughout the mitts.

25th round--Purl 1, make 1, knit 2, make 1, purl 1, this is for the
thumb; knit the rest of round plain.

Knit 4 rounds, (or 1 pattern,) purling the 1st and 6th stitches.

30th round--Purl 1, make 1, knit 4, make 1, purl 1, knit the rest to
pattern.

Knit 3 rounds, and continue increasing for the thumb, every 4th round
working the pattern on the thumb; continue until there are 14 stitches
on the thumb, knit 2 patterns without increasing; then leave the 14
stitches, or fasten them with a needle and thread; cast on 7 stitches,
and knit 5 patterns, then purl 2, knit 2 for 12 rounds, cast off, put
the 14 stitches on 2 pins, take up the 7 stitches, cast on, and knit 5
rounds of pattern, purl 2, knit 2 for 12 rounds, cast off.

Knit the other mitt exactly the same.


Point Lace Edging.

_Pins No. 19, boar's head cotton 34, cast on 15 stitches._

1st row--Knit 2, make 1, (knit 2 together twice,) make 1, knit 1, make
1, knit 2 together, knit 2, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 3.

2nd row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 3
together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit
2 together.

3rd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2,
make 1, knit 4.

4th row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together,
make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1, twice,) knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together.

5th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2,
make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2.

6th row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, (make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit
3 together, twice,) make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together.

7th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, (knit 2 together, make 1, knit
1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, twice,) knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 2.

8th row--Make 1, knit 2 together, (knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 3 together, make 1, twice,) knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together,
knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together.

9th row--Same as 7th row.

10th row--Make 1, (knit 2 together twice,) (make 1, knit 3 together,
make 1, knit 3, twice,) make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together.

11th row--Knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together,
knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, twice,) knit 2 together, knit
2.

12th row--Make 1, (knit 2 together twice,) (make 1, knit 2 together,
make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1, twice,) knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together.

13th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit
1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, (make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2,
twice.)

14th row--Make 1, (knit 2 together twice,) (make 1, knit 3 together,
make 1, knit 3, twice,) make 1, knit 2 together.

15th row--Knit 2, make 1, (knit 2 together twice,) make 1, knit 1, make
1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together,
knit 3.

16th row--Make 1, (knit 2 together twice,) make 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2,
make 1, knit 2 together.


Scollop Edging.

_Pins No. 18, boar's head cotton No. 24, cast on 8 stitches._

1st row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 3.

2nd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

3rd row--Knit 3, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 4.

4th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1.

5th row--The same as 1st row, knitting 1 plain stitch more.

6th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1.

7th row--The same as 5th.

8th row--Knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together twice,) make 1, knit 2, make
1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

9th row--Same as 5th.

10th row--Knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together twice,) make 1, knit 3, make
1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

11th row--Same as 5th.

12th row--Knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together, 3 times,) make 1, knit 2,
make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

13th row--Same as 5th.

14th row--Knit 2, (make 1, knit 2 together, 3 times,) make 1, knit 3,
make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

15th row--Same as 11th.

16th row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, (make 1, knit 2 together, 3 times,)
knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

17th row--Same as 9th.

18th row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, (make 1, knit 2 together, twice,)
knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

19th row--Same as 7th.

20th row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, (make 1, knit 2 together, twice,)
knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

21st row--Same as 5th.

22nd row--Knit 2, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2, make
1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

23rd row--Same as 3rd.

24th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1.


Diamond Edging.

_Pins No. 17, boar's head cotton No. 20, cast on 7 stitches._

1st row--Make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1, knit 2 together, knit
1.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2.

4th row--Plain.

5th row--Make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 5, make 1, knit 2.

6th row--Plain.

7th row--Make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit
2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1.

8th row--Plain.

9th row--(Make 1, knit 3 together, twice,) make 1, knit 2 together, knit
1.

10th row--Plain.

11th row--Make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1.

12th row--Plain.


Treble Diamond Edging.

_Cast on 7 stitches, Pins No. 17, cotton No. 20._

1st row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 2
together, knit 1.

2nd row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit the rest plain.

3rd row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2.

4th row--Same as 2nd.

5th row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit
1, make 1, knit 2.

6th row--Same as 2nd.

7th row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 3, make
1, knit 2.

8th row--Same as 2nd.

9th row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit
2 together, knit 1.

10th row--Same as 2nd.

11th row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3 together, make 1, knit
3 together, knit 2 together.

12th row--Same as 2nd.


Fringe for D'Oyleys.

_Pins No. 19, double cotton, cast on 8 stitches._

1st row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together.

All the rows are the same; when finished, cast off 5 stitches, leaving 3
to be pulled out for the fringe.


Travelling Cap.

_2 Colors, double Berlin wool, Pins No. 8, cast on 121 stitches._

1st row--Colored, purl.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Purl.

4th row--White, purl.

5th row--Make 1, knit 2 together.

Repeat the last 2 rows 3 times more.

13th row--Colored, purl.

14th row--Purl.

15th row--Plain.

16th row--White, purl.

17th row--Knit 2 together, make 1.

Repeat the 2 last rows 3 times more; work from 1st row once more; there
will now be 4 ribs of colored: this is for the front. Commence at the
other end of the pin, and knit 4 colored ribs; this will make the
pattern come on the wrong side. Knit 96 stitches, leaving 25 on the pin,
turn back, knit 71, turn back, leaving 25 on the other side; knit 6 ribs
of 71 stitches, then put all the stitches on 1 pin, and knit 4 ribs all
along; cast off, draw up the ends, and finish with cord and tassel.


Shetland Scarf.

_Pins No. 7, cast on 145 stitches._

Work the rosette, eglantier, or lattice pattern, as in D'Oyleys, and
finish with same fringe.

The first and last quarter of a yard looks well in 6 shades of wool.


Petit Point Quilt.

_Or Table Cover._

_Pins No. 5, double Berlin wool, shaded and plain white. With the white
   cast on 116 stitches for each yard; if larger, any even number of
   stitches._

1st row--Shaded wool, knit 1, bring the wool forward, slip 1, pass the
wool back.

2nd row--Purl 1, pass the wool back, slip 1, bring the wool forward.

3rd row--White, same as 1st row.

4th row--White, same as 2nd row.

Repeat these 4 rows until the required length, cast off, and finish with
the following


Border for Quilt.

_Measure the 4 sides of the work; cast on with white wool 188 stitches
   for each yard, and 18 for every 4 inches more._

1st row--Purl.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Shaded wool, (knit 2 together, 3 times,) (make 1, knit 1, 5
times,) make 1, (knit 2 together, 3 times,) knit 1.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Same as 3rd.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Same as 3rd.

8th row--White, purl.

Repeat from 1st row 4 times, knit 1 row, purl 1 row; cast off, and sew
on to quilt.


Baby's Socks.

_Pins No. 17, Berlin wool, pink and white. With pink cast on 34
   stitches._

Knit 6 rows, making a stitch at the beginning of every row; then 10
rows, making a stitch every other row; this increase is for the toe.
Knit 6 rows plain, knit 13 stitches at the toe, turn back, and knit 18
rows of 13 stitches; leave them on the pin, and with a third pin, and
white wool, commence at the other side. Knit a plain row, turn back,
make 1, knit 2 together, to the end. Next row, plain; turn back, make 1,
knit 2 together, for 16 stitches, leaving 16 on the pin; turn back, make
1, knit 2 together to the end, and repeat the 2 last rows 16 times. Cast
on 16 stitches; next row make 1, knit 2 together, to the end, or 32
stitches; 1 plain row; then with the colored wool that was left at the
13 stitches knit a plain row on, the 32 stitches of white; knit 6 rows
plain; then 10 rows, knitting 2 together every other row at the toe; and
6 rows, knitting 2 together at the beginning of every row: cast off. For
the leg, white wool raise 16 stitches from the colored part, and 12 from
the white piece across; knit the 16 stitches left on the pin; there will
now be 44 stitches on the pin. Pattern: make 1, knit 2 together; 3 rows
plain; repeat for 8 patterns, and cast off. Then, with colored wool,
cast on 9 stitches, knit 5 rows, and cast off; draw the slanting part
together, and sew this piece in.


Square Shawl.

_Pins No. 6, double Berlin or 4-thread fleecy, cast on 325 stitches._

1st row--Knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, knit 2 together, make
1, knit 1; at the end of row knit 1 plain.

2nd row--Purl.

3rd row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 3 together, make
1, knit 2.

4th row--Purl.

5th row--Knit 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, knit 2
together.

6th row--Purl.

7th row--Knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 2, make 1, knit 2 together,
knit 1, make 1, knit 3 together, repeat from mark; at the end of row,
make 1, knit 2 together.

8th row--Purl.

Work until square.


BORDER.

_In two Colors._

_Cast on 359 stitches._

With white, or any color that accords well with the middle, knit 6 rows
plain, knitting 2 together at the end of each row.

7th row--Same color as middle, knit 4, slip 2; at the end of these rows
knit 2 together.

8th row--Purl 4, slip 2.

9th row--Knit 3, slip 2, knit 1.

10th row--Purl 3, slip 2, purl 1.

Then with white 6 rows plain, knitting 2 together at the end.

17th row--With the color, knit 2, slip 2, knit 2; at the end of these
rows knit 2 together.

18th row--Purl 3, slip 2, purl 1.

19th row--Knit 1, slip 2, knit 3.

20th row--Purl 2, slip 2, purl 2.

White; knit 6 rows, knitting 2 together at the end.

27th row--Slip 2, knit 4.

28th row--Purl 1, slip 2, purl 3.

29th row--Knit 1, * knit 4, slip 2; repeat from mark.

30th row--Slip 2, purl 4.

With white knit 6 rows, cast off.

Work 4 pieces the same, sew them on to the shawl, and finish with a
knotted fringe.


Polka.

_For a Child._

_Pins No. 9, double Berlin wool, or 4-thread fleecy, cast on 252
   stitches with white._

1st row--Make 1, slip 1, knit 2 together; this is the stitch throughout
the Polka.

Knit 32 rows, join on the color, and knit 16 rows; then knit 51
stitches, knit 3 together, work on with pattern for 144 stitches, knit 3
together, finish the row with pattern. Next row knit 51 stitches, make
1, slip 1, knit 3 together, knit 145 stitches, make 1, slip 1, knit 3
together, finish the row with pattern. Knit 24 rows. Knit 51 stitches,
and knit 3 together, knit 142 stitches of pattern, knit 3 together;
finish the row with pattern. Next row knit 51 stitches of pattern, make
1, slip 1, knit 3 together, knit 139 stitches of pattern, make 1, slip
1, knit 3 together; finish with pattern. Knit 24 rows; decrease as
above, knitting 6 less in the middle. Knit 24 rows; decrease again. Knit
10 rows. Knit 51 stitches of pattern, then knit 1, knit 2 together, to
within 51 stitches of the end; finish with pattern.

Next row, after knitting the 51 stitches, make 1, slip 1, knit 3
together, within 51; there will now be 168 stitches on the pin. Knit 36
rows. Knit the 51 stitches, leave them, and with another pin, cast off 9
stitches for the arm hole, knit 48 stitches of pattern, cast off 9
stitches; leave the fronts on the pins, and knit 40 rows; then knit 3
together, finish the row in pattern. At the end of the next row, knit 3
together. Knit 3 rows. Knit 3 together at the end of the next row. Knit
12 rows. Knit 3 together at the end. Knit 12 rows. Knit 3 together. Cast
off the back.

For the fronts, knit 40 rows, knit 3 together at the arm hole; at the
end of next row, knit 3 together. Knit 8 rows, decrease again, knit 8
rows, decrease, knit 8 rows, decrease, knit 2 rows, decrease as before;
cast off 6 stitches at the front, decrease at the arm hole. Next row,
cast off 3 stitches, decrease at the arm hole, and cast off. Knit the
other front the same.

SLEEVE.

_Cast on 72 stitches._

Knit 70 rows of pattern.

71st row--Knit 54 stitches, turn back.

72nd row--Knit to the end.

73rd row--Knit 51 stitches, turn back.

74th row--Knit to the end.

75th row--Knit 42 stitches, turn, knit to the end.

77th row--Knit 36 stitches, turn, and knit to the end.

79th row--Knit 33 stitches, turn, and knit to the end.

81st row--Knit 30 stitches, turn, and knit to the end.

Then knit 22 rows all along; cast off.

COLLAR.

_Cast on 144 stitches._

With white, knit 24 rows; join on the color, knit 6 rows.

31st row--Knit 129 stitches, turn back, and knit to within 15 stitches
of the other end; turn back, knit till within 21. Next row, the same;
turn back, knit till within 30. Next row, the same, knit till within 33.
Next row, the same, knit till within 36. Cast off.

For the side border and cuffs, cast on 15 stitches with white, and knit
the length of the color.


Child's Frock.

_For a child 3 or 4 years of age._

_Pins No. 5, Berlin wool, 6 shades of each color, and white. With the
   darkest shade, cast on 348 stitches._

Pattern--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 4. All the rows are the same.

Knit 2 rows of each shade, and 12 of white; 12 shaded, 12 white, 12
shaded; knit the rest white until long enough.

BODY.

_Cast on 90 stitches._

With the 6th shade, knit the pattern to the lightest shade, and 4 rows
of white; then knit 15 stitches of pattern, cast off 12 stitches. With
another pin knit 36 stitches, turn back, and knit 8 rows of 36 stitches;
this is for the front.

For the back: on the side where the stitches were cast off, knit 8 rows
of white; on the other side, cast off 12 stitches, knit 8 rows; put all
the stitches on 1 pin again, and with the lightest shade, work to the
darkest.

FOR THE SLEEVES.

_Cast on 36 stitches with the darkest shade._

Knit to the lightest, then 16 of white; cast off. Sew the skirt to a
band, and round the neck and sleeves with a vandyke edging as 2nd
receipt.


Carriage Mat.

_No. 4 pins, 8-thread fleecy, or 4-thread doubled, border white with
   black spots, and scarlet or orange middle. With the white cast 73
   stitches; cut a skein of white and black in pieces of 6 inches._

1st row--Knit 1, take 2 pieces of the cut wool, white, put them on the
left pin, and cross them, so as to bring 1 end in front, and 1 at the
back; then with the right hand pin, knit the loop and a stitch together,
bring the end at the back forward between the pins.

2nd row--Plain.

3rd row--Slip the 1st stitch, and repeat the 1st row.

4th row--Plain.

5th row--The same as the 1st row, putting on 1 black loop and 6 white,
alternately.

6th row--Plain.

Repeat from 1st row once more; in the 5th row, put on 2 white loops
before commencing the pattern, to bring the black spots in a diamond.

Then commence the middle; knit in 7 loops of white, 22 of color, and 7
of white. Repeat until the middle is square, and knit the white to
correspond with the beginning.

When finished, it must be sent to be sheared and combed.


Réseau Quilt.

_Pins No. 9, 6-thread fleecy, pink and white; cast on 192 stitches with
   white._

1st row--Pink, having wool in front, slip 1, make 1, by turning the wool
round the pin, purl 2 together.

2nd row--With white, at other end of pin, knit 1, slip 1, (this is a
pink loop,) knit 1.

3rd row--Slip 1, purl 2.

4th row--With pink, at the other end, make 1, slip 1, knit 2 together.

5th row--White, knit 2, slip 1.

6th row--Slip 1, purl 2.

Repeat from 1st row. Finish with


KNITTED FRINGE.

_Cast on 12 stitches, with doubled wool._

1st row--Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 2; all the rows are the same.

Knit 12 rows of each color; when finished cast off 7 stitches, leaving 5
to be pulled out for the fringe.




TERMS USED IN CROCHET.


_To make a chain_--Make a loop, and draw the wool through it.

_To commence a row_--Put the needle in the side of the 1st stitch, bring
   the wool through, and work a chain stitch. After the 1st row, there
   is always a stitch at the side.

_Miss a stitch_--Pass over 1 of the row before.

_To increase_--Work 2 stitches in 1.

_To decrease_--Miss a stitch.

In crochet that is worked square, at the end of a row, cut the wool off,
   and draw it through to fasten it; begin at the other end.

_In the chain_--Put the needle through the loop formed by the chain
   stitches, in the row before, instead of in a stitch.




CROCHET.


Shepherd or Single Crochet.

_This stitch is usually worked round, for Cuffs, Muffatees, Boots, &c.
&c._

Make a chain, join it, keep the loop on the needle.

1st round--Put the needle in the 1st chain stitch, draw the wool
through; there will now be 2 loops on the needle; draw the last loop
through the 1st.

In the 2nd and following rounds, take the 1st part of the chain on the
needle.


Plain, Double, or French Crochet.

Make a chain. After commencing the row, put the needle in a stitch of
the chain, draw the wool through; there will be 2 loops on the needle.
Take the wool on the needle again, and draw it through the 2 loops. At
the end, cut the wool off, draw it through, and begin at the other end.


Treble Crochet.

Make a chain. After commencing the row, put the wool round the needle,
put the needle in a stitch of the chain, draw the wool through; there
will be 3 loops on the needle. Take the wool on the needle again, draw
it through 2 of the loops; take up the wool again, and draw it through
the 2. This is 1 stitch.


Crochet.

_In two colors._

This is always worked in plain crochet. Lay the color not wanted along,
and work over it. In changing the color, draw it through before
finishing the stitch, when there are 2 loops on the needle.


Six Crochet D'Oyleys, Round.

_These D'Oyleys are very beautiful._

_Boar's head cotton, No. 16, or Berlin wool, in plain, open, and treble
   Crochet._


DIAMOND PATTERN.

_Make a chain of 8 stitches, and join it._

1st round--1 treble 3 chain stitch in every chain stitch.

2nd round--3 treble, 3 chain, miss 1.

3rd round--5 treble, 3 chain, miss 1.

4th round--7 treble, 3 chain, miss 1.

5th round--9 treble, 3 chain, miss 1.

6th round--Miss 2, 7 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 2 chain.

7th round--Miss 2, 5 treble, 3 chain, miss 2, 3 treble, 3 chain.

8th round--Miss 3, 3 treble, 3 chain, miss 3, 5 treble, 3 chain.

9th round--Miss 1, 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 1, 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 1,
1 treble, 2 chain, miss 1, 7 treble, 2 chain.

10th round--3 treble, 2 chain, miss 3, 3 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 5
treble, 2 chain, miss 2.

11th round--5 treble, 2 chain, 5 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 3 treble, 2
chain, miss 2.

12th round--7 treble, 2 chain, 7 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 3
chain, miss 2.


DAMIER PATTERN.

_Make a chain of 9 stitches._

1st round--2 plain in every stitch.

2nd round--3 chain, miss 1, 1 plain.

3rd round--3 chain, miss 2, 1 plain.

4th round--3 chain, miss 3, 3 plain in 1 of the round before.

5th round--3 chain, miss 3, 2 plain in 1, 2 plain.

6th round--4 chain, miss 3, 2 plain in 1, 3 plain.

7th round--4 chain, miss 4, 2 plain in 1, 4 plain.

8th round--1 treble, 2 chain, miss 1.

9th round--8 chain, 3 plain, miss 4.

10th round--Plain.

11th round--6 chain, miss 9, 2 plain; the 2 plain are in the middle of
the 8 chain in the 9th round.

12th round--10 plain, and 2 in the 11th stitch.

13th round--3 treble, 3 chain, miss 2.

14th round--4 chain, miss 3, 3 treble.

15th round--4 treble, miss 3, 4 chain.


TRELLIS PATTERN.

_A chain of 12 stitches._

1st round--3 chain, and 1 plain in every stitch.

2nd round--3 chain, 1 plain; the plain stitch in the middle of the 3
chain, in the last round.

3rd round--5 chain, 1 plain; the plain stitch in the middle.

4th round--Same as 3rd.

5th round--6 chain, 1 plain.

6th round--Treble.

7th round--2 chain, miss 1, 1 treble.

8th round--2 treble in 1, miss 3, 2 chain; the 2 chain over the 2 in
last row.

9th round--Same as 8th.

10th round--2 treble in 1, miss 3, 3 chain.

11th round--2 treble, miss 3, 4 chain.

12th round--Same as 6th.


FILET PATTERN.

_Chain of 7 stitches._

1st round--9 chain, 1 plain in every stitch.

2nd round--7 plain, miss 3.

3rd round--6 chain, miss 5, 2 plain; the 2 plain in the middle of the
chain in 1st round.

4th round--3 plain, and 2 plain in the 4th stitch.

5th round--3 plain, 6 chain, miss 1.

6th round--Plain.

7th round--5 chain, miss 7, 2 plain in the chain of last round.

8th round--Plain.

9th round--5 chain, miss 2, 1 plain.

10th round--5 chain, miss 7, 1 plain in chain of last round.

11th round--Same as 10th.

12th round--Same as 10th.

13th round--5 plain, miss 1.

14th round--2 treble, 2 chain, miss 1.


SCOLLOP PATTERN.

_Make a chain of 9 stitches._

1st round--1 treble, 1 chain, in every stitch.

2nd round--2 treble, putting the needle through the chain of round
before, 2 chain.

3rd round--3 treble in the chain of last round, 3 chain.

4th round--5 treble in the chain, 2 chain.

5th round--7 treble in the chain, 1 chain.

6th round--10 chain, miss 7, 1 plain in the middle of the 7 treble in
last round.

7th round--1 treble, 1 chain, in every stitch for 8 stitches, miss 3.

8th and 9th rounds--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

10th round--3 plain, 6 chain, miss 5.

11th round--1 chain, miss 1, 1 plain, 1 chain, miss 1, 6 treble.

12th round--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.


SEME PATTERN.

_Make a chain of 9 stitches._

1st round--2 plain in every stitch.

2nd round--3 chain, 2 treble.

3rd round--4 chain, 2 treble in 1, miss 4.

4th round--2 treble in 1, 2 chain, miss 2.

5th round--2 chain, miss 2, 2 treble.

6th round--2 treble in 1, 3 chain, miss 3.

7th round--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

8th round--2 treble in 1, 2 chain, miss 3.

9th round--3 treble in 1, 1 chain, miss 3.

10th round--3 treble in 1, 2 chain, miss 3.

11th round--3 treble in 1, 3 chain, miss 4; the treble stitches in the
chain of the last round.


Fringe for D'Oyleys.

_Cut a skein of cotton in pieces of 3 inches._

Put the needle in a stitch of the work, take 2 pieces of the cotton,
fold them on the needle, draw them through, and draw the ends through
the loop, pull it tight.

Knitting cotton, No. 12, is the best for the fringe.


Scollop for D'Oyleys.

_To be worked on the D'Oyleys._

1st round--7 chain, miss 3, 5 plain.

2nd round--1 treble, 1 chain for 7 stitches, 1 chain, miss 2, 1 plain, 2
chain, miss 2.


Wheel Pattern Insertion.

_Boar's head cotton No. 20, fine steel needle, make a chain of 500
   stitches for each yard._

1st round--5 treble stitches in 1, 1 chain, miss 1, 1 plain, 1 chain,
miss 1.

2nd round--Turn the work so as to work in the chain on the other side;
work the same as 1st row, the 5 treble in the same stitch as the 5
treble on the other side.


Ecaille Pattern Edging.

_Boar's head cotton No. 34, fine steel needle, make a chain of 500
   stitches for each yard._

1st row--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

2nd row--3 chain, miss 1, 5 plain.

3rd row--6 chain, miss 5, (this over the 3 chain in the last row,) 3
plain, in the middle of the 5 plain in last row.

4th row--8 chain, miss 8, 1 plain in the middle of the 3 plain in the
last row.


Open Vandyke Edging.

_Chain and cotton as last receipt._

1st row--Treble.

2nd row--The same.

3rd row--1 plain, 4 chain, miss 1.

4th row--1 chain, 1 plain; the plain stitches are always in the middle
of the chain in last row; 4 chain, miss 5, 1 plain, 4 chain, miss 5, 1
plain, 4 chain, miss 5, 1 plain; turn back, so as to work on the 4th
row.

5th row--1 chain, miss 1, 1 plain, 4 chain, miss 5, 1 plain, 4 chain,
miss 5, 1 plain; turn back.

6th row--1 chain, miss 1, 1 plain, 4 chain, miss 5, 1 plain. Work 6
shepherd's stitches down the side of vandyke, so as to bring the thread
to the 3rd row: this forms 1 vandyke.

Repeat from 4th row.


Close Vandyke Edging.

_Commence as last receipt._

1st row--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

2nd row--2 chain, 5 treble; turn back, so as to work on 2nd row.

3rd row--2 chain, miss 1, 3 treble, turn back.

4th row--2 chain, miss 1, 1 treble, 2 chain; work 6 shepherd stitches
to bring the cotton to the 2nd row. Commence from 2nd row. When all the
vandykes are worked, finish with a row of 3 chain, miss 2, 3 plain, all
round them.


Double Scallop Edging.

_Commence as before._

1st row--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

2nd row--3 chain, miss 3, 3 treble.

3rd row--3 plain, 7 chain, miss 3.

4th row--1 chain, 1 plain, 1 chain, miss 1, (1 chain, 1 plain, 7 times.)

5th row--The same as 3rd, except the 3 plain stitches are to be worked
in the middle of the last scollop.

6th row--Same as 4th.


Diamond Insertion.

1st row--Treble.

2nd row--1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 3 treble, 2 chain, miss 2.

3rd row--2 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble.

4th row--Same as 2nd.

5th row--Same as 1st.


Cuffs.

_Diamond Pattern._

_Make a chain of 85 stitches, boar's head cotton No. 20._

1st row--1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 9 treble, 2 chain, miss 2; at the
end of these rows, 1 treble, 2 chain, beside the pattern. Work backwards
and forwards.

2nd row--2 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 7 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble.

3rd row--3 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 5 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 2 treble.

4th row--4 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 3 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 3 treble.

5th row--5 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 4 treble.

6th row--Same as 4th.

7th row--Same as 3rd.

8th row--Same as 2nd.

9th row--Same as 1st.


Edging for Cuffs.

_To be worked on._

1st row--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

2nd row--Treble.

3rd row--Same as 1st.

4th row--2 treble in the chain stitch of last row, 2 chain, 2 plain in
the 2 chain of last row, 5 chain; work the same on the other side.

Work down the side of the cuff plain, working 7 chain stitches for
button holes.


Crochet Collar.

_Make a chain of 120 stitches, No. 14 cotton._

1st row--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

2nd row--2 chain, 1 plain, miss 1.

3rd row--1 plain, 3 chain; the plain stitch is always in the middle of
the chain in the row before.

Repeat the 3rd row 10 times. Then 1 row, 5 chain, 1 plain, miss 4.

Finish with a small cord and tassels.


Round Sofa Pillow.

_Double Berlin wool, make a chain of 100 stitches, work it backwards and
   forwards. Shaded wool, colors violet, green, scarlet, blue, and
   orange._

1st row--Violet, 1 chain, 3 treble in 1, miss 3.

Work 5 rows more the same, always working the 3 treble stitches in the
chain stitch of the row before; then 6 rows of green, 6 of scarlet, 6
blue, 6 orange, and commence at 1st row.

The size must be according to the pillow it is to cover, about 16
inches.


Bead Crochet.

Thread the beads on the silk, and pass a bead down before working the
stitch; this is always worked on the wrong side.


Handsome Bead Purse.

_With square ends, pattern No. 1, middle size netting silk, colours
   ponceau white, shaded green, and No. 5 steel beads. Make a chain of
   80 stitches._

With ponceau make it round, and work 2 rounds plain; then 5 rounds of
pattern in ponceau, 5 in white, 14 in shaded green, 5 in white, 5 of
ponceau, 8 rounds plain ponceau, and 34 rows backwards and forwards, for
the opening, working 3 bead stitches at the beginning and end of every
other row; make it round again, work 3 plain rounds, repeat pattern.

Finish the ends with a fringe of steel beads.

[Illustration: 1]


Bead Purse.

_Pattern No. 4._

_Colours white and shaded blue, gold or steel beads, No. 5. Make a chain
   of 88 stitches white._

Make it round; work 2 rounds plain, and 3 rounds, putting a bead on
every stitch, shaded blue; work the star pattern; then 3 rounds in beads
with white, 6 rounds plain, and 34 rows backwards and forwards for the
opening, working 3 bead stitches at the beginning and end of every other
row; make it round, and repeat the pattern.

Finish with a fringe of beads.

[Illustration: 4]


Table Cover.

_In squares, plain crochet._

_Each square is a different color in Berlin wool; colors violet, green,
   scarlet, stone, blue, and orange, 6 shades of each color and black;
   work 2 rounds of each shade. Make a chain of 8 stitches with the
   lightest shade._

1st round--Work 2 stitches in 1.

2nd round--3 stitches in 1, 3 plain.

3rd round--3 stitches in 1, 5 plain.

4th round--2nd shade, 3 in 1, 7 plain.

5th round--3 stitches in 1, 9 plain.

6th round--3rd shade, 3 in 1, 11 plain.

7th round--3 in 1, 13 plain.

8th round--4th shade, 3 in 1, 15 plain.

9th round--3 in 1, 17 plain.

10th round--5th shade, 5 in 1, 19 plain.

11th round--3 in 1, 21 plain.

12th round--6th shade, 3 in 1, 23 plain.

13th round--3 in 1, 25 plain.

14th round--Black, 3 in 1, 27 plain.

15th round--3 in 1, 29 plain.

This finishes 1 square. Work all the colors the same; when sufficient
are made, crochet them together with black. A small pattern may also be
worked in each square.


Bell Pulls.

_Pattern No. 2._

_In double Berlin wool, the ground claret, 4 shades of green, and 3 of
   orange; make a chain of 50 stitches for each quarter of a yard._

1st row--Orange.

2nd row--2nd shade.

3rd row--3rd shade.

4th row--Claret.

5th row--Darkest green and claret; work the first row of pattern with
the green.

6th row--2nd shade of green and claret.

7th row--3rd shade of green and claret.

8th row--4th shade of green and 2nd shade of orange.

9th row--4th shade of green, 3rd shade of orange.

10th row--Same as 7th.

11th row--Same as 6th.

12th row--Same as 5th.

13th row--Same as 4th.

14th row--Same as 3rd.

15th row--As 2nd.

16th row--As 1st.

[Illustration: 2]


Greek Cap.

_Patterns Nos. 3 and 9._

_Coarse Netting Silk, and Gold Twist._

_Ground black, 3 shades of ponceau, 3 of green, 4 of orange; make a
   chain of 7 stitches with black._

1st round--2 stitches in 1.

2nd round--1 ponceau, lightest shade, 1 ponceau, 2 black in 1.

3rd round--2 ponceau in 1, 2 black.

4th round--2 ponceau in 1 ponceau, 2 black.

5th round--2 ponceau in 1, 2 ponceau, 2 black.

Repeat the 2 last rounds, working 1 ponceau more each round until there
are 102 stitches; 3 rounds of black, 4 plain, 2 in the 5th stitch; 3
rounds of gold, thus--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1, 1 black round plain,
next round black, 4 plain and 2 in 1 in the 5th stitch, then work the
pattern with black ground.

1st round--Darkest green and black.

2nd round--2nd shade of green and black.

3rd round--3rd shade of green and black.

4th round--Darkest ponceau and black.

5th round--2nd shade and black.

6th round--3rd shade and black.

7th round--Darkest blue and black.

8th round--2nd shade and black.

9th round--3rd shade and black.

10th round--Darkest orange and black.

11th round--2nd shade and black.

12th round--3rd shade and black.

13th round--4th shade and black.

14th round--Plain black.

15th round--Black, 4 plain and 2 in 1 in the 5th stitch.

This finishes the increase; it will now be 22 inches round; repeat the
gold rounds and the pattern until within 2 inches of the finish; then
work the 3 rounds of gold, 1 round of ponceau; then pattern No. 9 in the
gold on ponceau ground.

If required larger, it must be increased before the 2nd pine pattern in
the black rounds.

[Illustration: 3]

[Illustration: 9]


Cigar or Card Case.

_Pattern No. 4._

_Middle sized silk, shaded scarlet and blue No. 6, steel and gold beads.
   Make a chain of 10 stitches in scarlet._

1st round--2 stitches in 1.

2nd round--1 plain, 2 in the 2nd stitch.

3rd round--2 in the 3rd stitch, repeat the last round, working 1 stitch
more until there are 128 stitches; thread on the scarlet 3 rows of steel
beads; work 3 rounds, putting a bead on every stitch; thread the gold
beads on the blue; work 1 plain round; then commence the star pattern;
after the pattern 1 plain row; thread three rows of steel beads on the
blue, and work three rounds a bead on every stitch; then work the star
pattern in scarlet and gold beads; work another piece the same. It is
then made up on a frame.


Bag.

_In Treble Open Crochet._

_Colors, white, blue, and gold twist._

_Make a chain of 140 stitches._

Pattern, 1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1, work 3 rounds of each color for 5
inches, and finish with cord and tassels to match.


Square Sofa Pillow.

_Pattern No. 5. Berlin wool._

_Make a chain of 160 stitches, or 100 for double Berlin wool. Colours, 4
   shades of green, 4 of scarlet, 4 of stone, and white._

1st pattern--Open crochet, 3 treble, 3 chain, miss 3.

1st row--Darkest green.

2nd row--3rd shade of green, working the 3 treble stitches in the 3
chain of the last row.

3rd row--2nd shade of green.

4th row--1st shade of green.

2nd pattern, No. 5.

1st row--Darkest stone and darkest scarlet.

2nd row--3rd shades of stone and scarlet.

3rd row--2nd shades of stone and scarlet.

4th row--1st shades of stone and scarlet.

5th row--White. This is the ground of the stripe.

6th row--1st shade of green and white.

7th row--2nd shade and white.

8th row--3rd shade and white.

9th row--4th shade and white.

10th row--Same as 9th.

11th row--Same as 8th.

12th row--Same as 7th.

13th row--Same as 6th.

14th row--As 5th.

15th row--As 4th.

16th row--As 3rd.

17th row--As 2nd.

18th row--As 1st.

Then work the open pattern again, and repeat until square.

[Illustration: 5]


Half-Square Shawl.

_Plain Crochet. Double Chené wool of various colors and black. Make a
   chain of 3 stitches._

1st row--Work 2 stitches in 1 at the beginning of the row; work the rest
plain at the end of the row; leave 7 inches of wool for the fringe. In
commencing a row the ends must be worked under for a few stitches.

Pattern--1 row black and 2 chené. Increase until there are 350 stitches;
then loop in a fringe to correspond with the other side.


Another Shawl.

_3 Shades of Violet, 3 of Stone, and White._

Increase as the last, and work 1 row of each shade.


Crochet Shoes.

_Berlin wool, pattern No. 6._

The shoes must be worked from a paper pattern the size required.
Commence at the toe, and increase by working 2 stitches in 1 at the
beginning and end of the row until sufficiently deep. For the sides work
about a third of the front.

Gold color and French blue for the ground, and 3 shades of each for the
pattern.

1st row--2 stitches of blue and 2 of gold.

2nd row--Gold.

3rd row--Gold and dark blue.

4th row--2nd shade of blue and gold.

5th row--3rd shade of blue and gold.

6th row--Gold color, repeat from 1st row.

The next pattern the same, except the ground is blue, and the spots
shades of gold.

[Illustration: 6]


Sole for Shoes.

_6 Thread Black Fleecy._

_Make a chain of 8 stitches._

1st row--1 row plain. This is not repeated.

2nd row--Take both sides of the chain on the needle and work according
to shape, working it backwards and forwards.


Crochet Purse.

_2nd size Netting Silk, 2 colours. No. 6 steel beads. Make a chain of
   120 stitches._

1st row--1 treble, 1 chain, pass a bead down, miss 1; work 2 rows of
each colour for 6 inches.


Shamrock Purse.

_Pattern No. 8._

_In close crochet, fine silk; colors, green, violet, and white; steel
   and gold beads, No. 5. Make a chain of 150 stitches with white;
   thread the steel beads upon the white._

Work 3 rows the same as in last receipt, then with green and gold beads,
work the pattern; then 3 rows of white, with steel beads, as before, and
with violet and gold beads, work the pattern again.

Three stripes of each color form the purse.

[Illustration: 8]


Honeycomb Edging.

_Make a chain of 480 stitches for each yard. Boar's head cotton No. 24._

1st row--10 chain, miss 5 (1 plain, 3 chain, miss 1, 4 times), 1 plain.

2nd row--1 treble, 1 chain in the 3 chain of the row before; repeat 6
times, 1 chain (1 plain, 3 chain, miss 4, 3 times), 1 plain, 1 chain.

3rd row--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1, 7 times, 1 chain (1 plain, 1 chain,
miss 4, twice), 1 plain, 1 chain.

4th row--1 plain and 3 treble in every treble stitch of the last row;
then 1 chain, 1 plain, 3 chain, 1 plain, 1 chain.


Anti-Macassar.

_Boar's head cotton No. 10, or knitting cotton No. 12. Make a chain of
   145 stitches. Work backwards and forwards._

1st row--4 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 3 treble;
at the end, work 1 treble, 2 chain, beside the pattern.

2nd row--3 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1, 1 treble,
2 chain, miss 2, 2 treble.

3rd row--2 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1, 1 treble,
1 chain, miss 1, 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, 1 treble.

4th row--1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2, (1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1, 3
times,) 1 treble, 2 chain, miss 2.

5th row--Same as 3rd.

6th row--Same as 2nd.

7th row--Same as 1st.

Work 24 inches. Finish with double scollop edging.


Travelling Bag.

_Pattern No. 7._

_In double Berlin wool, 5 shades of scarlet, 4 shades of stone, 4 shades
   of couleur de bois, light green, black, white, and shaded blue. Make
   a chain of 150 stitches._

1st row--Black and darkest bois, 2 stitches of each.

2nd row--2nd shade and black.

3rd row--3rd shade, plain.

4th row--4th shade and green, 21 stitches of green, and 3 of bois,
lightest shade.

5th row--White and 1st shade of scarlet, 21 white, and 3 scarlet.

6th row--2nd shade of scarlet, 1st shade of stone; 3 stone, 15 scarlet,
3 stone, 3 scarlet.

7th row--2nd shade of stone, 3rd shade of scarlet; same as 6th row.

8th row--3rd shade of stone, 4th shade of scarlet; same as 7th row.

9th row--4th shade of stone, 5th shade of scarlet.

10th row--Same as 9th.

Repeat the colors back again, ending with a plain row of the darkest
couleur de bois, and the 2 rows of 2 stitches; then 6 rows of shaded
blue; work until there are 18 inches.

Finish with a clasp.

[Illustration: 7]


Table Cover.

_Pattern No. 9._

_Berlin wool. Make a chain of 350 stitches in single wool, or 200 in
   double, for each 1/2-yard. Colors--4 shades of crimson, green, and
   violet; ground--black and shaded orange._

1st row--Black.

2nd row--Lightest crimson and black.

3rd row--2nd shade crimson and black.

4th row--3rd shade and black.

5th row--4th shade and black.

6th row--Dark green and black.

7th row--2nd shade and black.

8th row--3rd shade and black.

9th row--4th shade and black.

10th row--White and black.

11th row--Lightest violet and black.

12th row--2nd shade of violet and black.

13th row--3rd shade and black.

14th row--4th shade and black.

Then 1 row of black, and 6 rows of shaded orange.


A Chain.

_Fine brown braid._

Wind the braid in 2 balls, join them together, and make a loop; then,
holding the 2 braids over the 4th finger, work a chain stitch with each
of the braids alternately, until 1 yard and a 1/4 long. Fasten it with a
steel slide.


Cap.

_In Berlin wool shaded, and floss silk. Make a chain of 120 stitches._

Pattern--1 treble, 1 chain, miss 1.

Work 12 rows, leaving 1 stitch at the beginning and end of every row, to
decrease it; work a row all round, and then commence the

BORDER.

1st row--Work 3 chain stitches, miss 1, 1 plain.

2nd row--The same.

3rd row--5 chain, miss 4, 1 plain; the plain stitch in the middle of the
chain of last row.

4th row--Same as 3rd for a 3rd of the row; break the wool off.

5th row--6 chain, miss 6, 1 plain, for a 3rd of the row.

Work the other side the same; then a row of the floss silk, the same as
the 5th, all along.

Finish with a ribbon for the back and ends.




NETTING.


Anti-Macassar.

_As Pattern No. 10._

_Mesh No. 6, cotton No. 12, foundation 70 stitches._

Net 120 rows. For the fringe, with double cotton, and a mesh 2 inches
wide, net 2 stitches in 1 all round; it is then embroidered thus--thread
a rug needle with the cotton, and begin in the corner; take 1 thread,
and miss 1, twice, as in darning; work 5 threads in each; then work the
contrary way, forming a vandyke. Work 2 rows in this manner; then count
the middle stitch of the work, and make a diamond, same as the border.

Various patterns may be worked in this manner, but they are impossible
to describe.

[Illustration: 10]


D'Oyley.

_Mesh No. 8, cotton No. 12, 34 stitches._

Net 53 rows.

Fringe--Mesh 1 inch wide, 2 stitches in 1, all round.

Embroidered as Anti-Macassar.


Bread Basket D'Oyley.

_Mesh No. 6, cotton No. 12, 50 stitches._

Net 126 rows. Fringe as D'Oyley.


Netted Purse.

_For a Gentleman._

_Mesh No. 15, coarse netting silk, 90 stitches._

Net 8 inches; join up 34 stitches on each side, leaving 22 for the
opening.

This purse takes 4 skeins of silk.


Lady's Purse.

_Mesh No. 16, 3 skeins of 2nd size purse silk, 70 stitches._

Net 8 inches, join up 26 stitches on each side, leaving 18 for the
opening.


Bead Purse.

_Mesh No. 14, coarse silk, and No. 7 beads 3 bunches, 60 stitches;
   measure 1 yard and a 1/4 of silk, thread a small sewing needle with
   it._

1st row--Net the 1st stitch, thread 2 beads, pass them close to the last
stitch; net the stitch, and continue putting 2 beads in every stitch.

2nd row--The same, keeping the 2 beads on the outside.

Work 7 inches, join up 22 stitches on each side, leaving 16 for the
opening.


Wedding Purse.

_With Motto No. 11._

_Extra fine white netting silk, and No. 4 gold beads; meshes Nos. 6, 16,
   and 19; 65 stitches._

With No. 16 mesh net 7 rows.

No. 6 mesh, net 3 stitches in 1.

No. 19 mesh, net 3 plain rows.

No. 6 mesh, net 1 row.

No. 16 mesh, net a row, netting 3 stitches together every stitch;
repeat. Net 7 rows.

Repeat this pattern twice more.

In the next pattern, instead of working the 3 rows with No. 19 mesh,
work the motto No. 2.

With No. 19 mesh, net 1 plain row, net 62 stitches, and then begin the
motto; finish the row plain. Then cut the silk off, commence at the
other end, and work the second row of motto; at the end of this row, cut
the silk off, and knot the 2 ends together, to prevent losing a stitch.
After the motto is finished, net 1 plain row, and repeat the first
pattern 3 times.

The beads are put on in the following manner,--thread a bead, (with a
small needle,) net 1 stitch, pass the silk under the mesh, put the
needle through the bead, bring the silk in front again; this brings the
bead on the knot.

[Illustration: 11

_Sia Felice_]

Another Purse.

_With motto No. 12._

_Fine silk, brown or blue, mesh No. 18, No. 5 steel beads, 90 stitches._

Net 4 inches plain.

Then commence the motto, putting the beads in as former receipt.

Net 25 stitches, net the first row of motto, finish the row plain; cut
the silk off, and commence at the other end. Net 4 inches plain, to
correspond with the other side.

[Illustration: 12

_Memoria_]




  LONDON:
  Printed by Kelly & Pritchett, 32, Houndsditch.




ERRATA.


Page 45, in 9th row, for slip 1, read _slip 2_.

Page 45, in 19th row, for purl 1, read _knit 3_.

Page 59, in 1st round, for 1 treble, read _1 treble 3 chain_.

Page 62, in second round, for 7 chain, read _7 plain_.




Transcriber's Note


The following typographical errors were corrected:

  Page  Error
    2   are all guaged changed to are all gauged
    2   wire-drawer's guage changed to wire-drawer's gauge
   18   knit 2 together changed to knit 2 together.
   18   69 stitches, or 12 changed to 69 stitches, or 13
   18   3rd row knit 3 together, knit changed to 3rd row knit 3 together,
        knit 1,
   19   long bead tassells changed to long bead tassels
   64   10th rouud changed to 10th round
   66   miss 1, 5 plain, changed to miss 1, 5 plain.
   73   fringe of beads changed to fringe of beads.
   77   round of ponceau: changed to round of ponceau;
   81   2 of gold, changed to 2 of gold.
   84   1 chain, miss 4 twice changed to 1 chain, miss 4, twice
   87   14th row--4 changed to 14th row--4th
   89   a vankyke. changed to a vandyke.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Knitting, Crochet, and Netting, with
Twelve Illustrations, by Éléonore Riego de la Branchardière

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNITTING, CROCHET, NETTING ***

***** This file should be named 36669-8.txt or 36669-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/6/36669/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
