The Project Gutenberg EBook of Journal of Entomology and Zoology, by 
Horace Gunthorp and Charles P. Alexander and W. A. Hilton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Journal of Entomology and Zoology
       Volume 11, Number 4, December 1919

Author: Horace Gunthorp
        Charles P. Alexander
        W. A. Hilton

Editor: Pomona College Department of Zoology

Release Date: October 5, 2011 [EBook #37632]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF ENTOMOLOGY AND ZOOLOGY ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











VOLUME ELEVEN            NUMBER FOUR

JOURNAL
OF
ENTOMOLOGY
AND
ZOOLOGY

DECEMBER, 1919

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY
POMONA COLLEGE DEPARTMENT _of_ ZOOLOGY
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA, U. S. A.




CONTENTS


                                                              Page

NOTES ON THE BEHAVIOR OF THE SOCIAL WASP POLISTES
    --_Horace Gunthorp_                                        63

BIOLOGY OF THE NORTH AMERICAN CRANE-FLIES. V. THE
    GENUS DICRANOPTYCHA--_Charles P. Alexander_                67

THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM OF NUCULA AND MALLETIA
    --_W. A. Hilton_                                           75


Entered Claremont, Cal., Post-Office Oct. 1, 1910, as second-class
matter, under Act of Congress of March 3, 1879




Journal of Entomology and Zoology

EDITED BY POMONA COLLEGE, DEPARTMENT OF ZOOLOGY


_Subscription_ $1.00 to domestic, $1.25 to foreign countries.

This journal is especially offered in exchange for zoological and
entomological journals, proceedings, transactions, reports of
societies, museums, laboratories and expeditions.

The pages of the journal are especially open to western entomologists
and zoologists. Notes and papers relating to western and Californian
forms and conditions are particularly desired, but short morphological,
systematic or economic studies from any locality will be considered for
publication.

Manuscripts submitted should be typewritten on one side of paper about
8 by 11 inches. Foot notes, tables, explanations of figures, etc.,
should be written on separate sheets. Foot notes and figures should be
numbered consecutively throughout. The desired position of foot notes
and figures should be clearly indicated in the manuscript.

Figures should be drawn so that they may be reproduced as line cuts so
far as possible. An unusually large number of half tones must be paid
for in part by the author. Other more expensive illustrations will be
furnished at cost. Figures for cuts should be made to conform to the
size of the page when reduced, that is, 5 by 7-1/2 inches or less. The
lettering should be by means of printed numbers and letters pasted on
the drawings, in most cases.

Authors of articles longer than a thousand words will receive fifty
reprints of their publications free of cost. If more than this are
desired, the order should be given with the return of the proof sheets.
Extra copies and special covers or special paper will be furnished at
cost. Authors of short contributions will receive a few extra copies of
the number containing their articles.

Manuscripts should be sent by express or registered mail.

Address all communications to

THE JOURNAL OF ENTOMOLOGY AND ZOOLOGY
William A. Hilton, Editor
Claremont, California, U. S. A.




Notes on the Behavior of the Social Wasp Polistes

HORACE GUNTHORP

Washburn College, Topeka, Kans.


One day last September the writer picked up a nest of the common social
wasp, _Polistes_, which had been detached from its support, and placed
it upon his desk. A short time later he was attracted by a scratching
sound, and discovered that one of the wasps was just beginning to cut
the cap from its cell preparatory to emerging. During the next few days
a series of observations were made and notes taken covering the
behavior of the wasps which emerged from their cells during that
period. Miss Enteman[A] has made a careful study of the instincts of
the social wasps, and while the observations recorded in the present
paper are largely corroborative of her work, some interesting details
are here added.

The cutting of the cap of the cell occupied some time, and extended
around four-fifths of its circumference, the remaining one-fifth being
gnawed and partially chewed through so that it was flexible enough to
act as a hinge for the cap. After the cap was sufficiently cut away,
the wasp started to slowly work itself out, pushing up the top of the
cell like a trap door as progress was made. A good deal of effort was
required to get the body out until the front legs were freed. Then the
wasp had more purchase and progress was somewhat faster until the
second pair of legs came out. After this slight effort seemed to be
necessary for the completion of the operation.

For the next thirty minutes careful observations were made of the
movements of this wasp in order to ascertain its first reactions. It is
evident that they would be somewhat modified from what they are here
recorded if the colony had contained the queen and other workers, as
this specimen had the run of the entire nest, and none of its movements
were effected by those of other individuals. It is equally evident that
all stimuli came from within, or from contact with the nest, and not
from suggestions received from other individuals or from contact with
them. The following is the record made at one minute intervals,
beginning with the time the specimen left its cell:

     8:06. Specimen emerged from its cell.

     8:07. Cleaned its front legs in its mouth and its antennæ
           with its front legs.

     8:08. Moved around some. Rubbed its wings with its hind legs
           and spread them out twice.

     8:09. Cleaned antennæ and front legs.

     8:10. Swung abdomen back and forth, and brushed its wings.
           Moved around the nest rapidly and waved the antennæ,
           but all movements were jerky.

     8:11. Explored nest, occasionally rubbing abdomen with legs.

     8:12. Explored nest.

     8:13. Explored nest. Movements unsteady. Cleaned antennæ and
           front legs.

     8:14. Explored nest, in the course of which it went over the
           edge on to the back side, but immediately returned to
           the under side. Cleaned the front legs and antennæ,
           and then the hind legs.

     8:15. Spread out the wings. Cleaned the antennæ.

     8:16. Cleaned abdomen.

     8:17. Crawled on top or back side of nest again and stayed
           there. Cleaned wings and abdomen.

     8:18. Explored top. Cleaned front legs and antennæ.

     8:19. Stood still. Occasional movement of head, antennæ or
           abdomen.

     8:20. Same as 8:19.

     8:21. Began to explore again, becoming quite lively. Antennæ
           constantly waving.

     8:22. Same as 8:21, but extended its travels to the under
           (cell) side of the nest.

     8:23. Left the nest entirely and began to walk around the
           surface of the desk.

     8:24. Started to climb a bottle that was some six inches
           from the nest. Antennæ still waving.

     8:25. On the neck of the bottle, two inches above the
           surface of the desk. Cleaned front legs and antennæ.

     8:26. Quiet except that it spread its wings once.

     8:27. Still on neck of bottle. Moved its head and antennæ
           back and forth.

     8:28. Slight change in position. Antennæ were still waving.
           Rubbed its wings, spread them, and then rubbed them
           again.

     8:29. Rubbed its hind legs together vigorously.

     8:30. Spread wings once, then rubbed them and the abdomen
           with the hind legs. Rubbed the hind legs together, and
           finally rubbed the right wings vigorously.

     8:31. Moved around some, occasionally stopping to rub the
           right wings.

     8:32. Explored the neck of the bottle.

     8:33. Same as 8:32. Cleaned antennæ.

     8:34. Same as 8:33.

     8:35. Stood still but continued to clean antennæ and front
           legs.

     8:36. Climbed up and explored the cork of the bottle.

     8:37-8:40. Stood still on the cork, occasionally moving its
           jaws.

At 8:40 the nest was placed against the cork and the wasp immediately
crawled onto it, but seemed restless. As the nest has a faint, but
distinct, odor of honey, it was probably attracted to it through the
sense of smell.

The next morning the specimen was nowhere in sight, but forty-eight
hours later it fell out of a loose-leaf binder that had been lying on
the desk. It seemed to be as active as when seen two days before. Some
time during the second night after the appearance of the first
specimen, that is, when it was some thirty hours old, a second
individual emerged. This one was discovered on a pile of books two feet
from the nest where it had evidently crawled soon after emerging.

As soon as the first specimen was rediscovered, that is, when it was
sixty hours old, the second wasp then being thirty hours old, the two
were placed on the nest, and this in turn was placed on a book. They
both started on tours of observation, and every time they came in
contact with each other they made sudden starts and jumps to avoid an
evidently startling new object, meanwhile violently waving their
antennæ and often cleaning these organs after such contact. Dr. Enteman
says, "All wasps possess the instinct of fear. This ... is readily
overcome by the frequent appearance of the awe-inspiring object." This
is true, because they were evidently on familiar terms with each other
in half an hour, and paid very little attention to the frequent
meetings which before had apparently distressed them. They wandered
freely over their nest and the top surface of the book on which it was
placed, but did not attempt to climb off the latter.

At 12 o'clock, four hours later, a third wasp had appeared, and none of
the specimens seemed to be disturbed by the presence of the others.
When the nest was first picked up, one cell containing a well formed
pupa was uncapped. This specimen was then alive, but it may have been
dead at the time of this observation. In either case, it had been
dragged out of its cell, decapitated, and the front legs torn off. No
trace of the head was found, but the body and legs were on the book
about one inch from the nest. Whether this act was connected with the
hunger of the wasps themselves or with the first development of the
instinct of feeding the larvæ in the nest, which Miss Enteman says
begins without imitation, is not clear.

At 2 p. m. (two hours later) the colony was placed out of doors, still
on the book. Two of the wasps soon left the latter, and settled near
it, keeping very quiet for half an hour. The third kept climbing over
and around the nest. At 2:30 one of the two wasps returned to the nest.

At 3 p. m. two of the specimens were on the ground near the porch. They
made only short flights, resembling jumps with the wings assisting,
this being true even when they were disturbed. The third wasp was
beside the colony, chewing on the decapitated pupa, probably getting
some nourishment from it in the process.

During the afternoon the nest was disturbed, and at 6 p. m. all three
specimens had gone from the porch. One was found wandering aimlessly on
a canna leaf near by. It did not seem to be able to fly well. The other
two had disappeared entirely.

The nest was saved and several days later a fourth wasp appeared. It
was a very lively specimen, and spent the first few hours actively
exploring the nest. It seemed of a very nervous disposition, being more
easily disturbed than any of the others had been. Every time the nest
was picked up, it would start for the fingers or forceps holding it. At
one time it was observed with its whole body in a cell, head downward,
evidently examining the interior. After staying close to the nest for a
day, it began to fly around the floor of the room, paying no more
attention to its former home. Even when it was placed on or near it, it
would almost immediately crawl or fly away. Its flying was erratic, and
seemed to lack power, but it got along much better than any of the
other three had done.

From the above observations it would appear that the movements of the
wasp recorded at one minute intervals after emergence from its cell
were probably reactions due to the discomfort of the drying and
hardening of the tissues. At first the wasps apparently had very
little, if any, home instinct. The only things to indicate that they
had any were the facts that the first specimen so readily left the cork
on which it was sitting and went back to its nest when the latter was
held near it, and the fourth wasp stayed on or near the nest for the
first twelve hours. But all the specimens observed left the nest the
first night and showed no intention or disposition to return. The
presence of a second wasp seemed to bring the home instinct into
existence more forcibly, as the first and second wasps stayed with the
nest for six or seven hours when they were returned to it together,
while the fourth one repeatedly left the empty nest almost at once when
it was returned to it. But this instinct was seemingly not very strong,
as they soon wandered away when placed out of doors. They seemed to
have no idea as to how to carry on the work of the colony, but wandered
aimlessly over it. Perhaps this was due to the fact that they were too
young, as Miss Enteman says the development of the nursing instinct is
usually manifested "any time after the first half day of imaginal
life," but was observed in some neuters as young as four hours, while
in others it was delayed for two weeks.

While the above observations are admittedly too few from which to draw
definite conclusions, they seem to warrant the following assumptions,
the first three of which are quoted from Miss Enteman, and hence are
simply corroborative of her work:

     1. "All wasps possess the instinct of fear. This is
        especially strong the first few days after emergence,
        but is readily overcome by the frequent appearance of
        the awe-inspiring object.

     2. "In a sense, the wasp remembers. This is indicated by the
        manner in which it accustoms itself to the sight of
        strange objects, and by its behavior when a change is
        made in its nest or surroundings.

     3. "It shows considerable individual variability, both as to
        time and manner of its response to stimuli."

     4. After emergence, the first reactions are associated
        simply with the discomfort of the hardening of the
        tissues.

     5. It has marked curiosity, as shown by its repeated
        inspection of its nest and other familiar objects.

     6. The "home instinct" seems to be slight when the wasp is
        alone, but becomes stronger when two or more are on the
        same nest.

     7. The olfactory sense is closely associated with the early
        instincts of the wasp.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: Minnie Marie Enteman. "Some Observations on the Behavior
of the Social Wasps." Pop. Sci. Mo., 61: 339-351, 1902.]




The Biology of the North American Crane-Flies

(Tipulidæ, Diptera)

V. The Genus Dicranoptycha Osten Sacken

BY CHARLES P. ALEXANDER, Ph.D. (Cornell)


GENERIC DIAGNOSIS

_Larva._ Form very elongate, terete; integument smooth, glassy,
transparent; abdominal segments two to eight with a basal transverse
band or area of microscopic chitinized points on the ventral surface;
segment eight with a similar band on the dorsum. Spiracular disk
surrounded by four lobes, the lateral pair more slender than the blunt
ventral pair; dorsal lobe very low or lacking; spiracles small, widely
separated; a triangular brown mark on the disk between the spiracles;
anal gills a fleshy protuberant ring surrounding the anus. Head-capsule
compact, massive, the præfrons large with a few marginal punctures;
externo-lateral plates very broad. Labrum large, flattened, pale;
antennæ two-segmented, the apical segment almost as long as the basal
segment, narrowed to the blunt tip; mandibles with a blunt dorsal and
two blunt ventral teeth; maxillæ generalized in structure; hypopharynx
a rounded cushion; mentum deeply split behind but not completely
divided, with three principle teeth and a small lateral tooth on either
side.

_Pupa._ Cephalic crest low, depressed, setiferous; labrum tumid; labial
lobes oval, contiguous; antennal sheaths ending opposite the base of
the wing. Pronotal breathing-horns microscopic, represented only by
tiny triangular tubercles; mesonotum unarmed; wing-sheaths ending
opposite the middle of the third abdominal segment; leg-sheaths ending
opposite the base of the fifth abdominal segment, the tarsi terminating
on a level, or nearly so. Abdominal tergites and sternites each with
four transverse rows of microscopic setæ; lateral spiracles on segments
two to seven.


DISCUSSION OF THE GENUS

The genus _Dicranoptycha_ was erected by Osten Sacken in 1860 (Proc.
Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. for 1859, p. 217). The genus includes a small
group of crane-flies with a Holarctic distribution, there being about
six species in North America and two, or possibly three, in Europe. As
I have indicated elsewhere, _D. signaticollis_ v.d.W. of Java is
undoubtedly a species of _Libnotes_. Of the American species, _D.
germana_ O.S. is characteristic of the Canadian life-zone of
northeastern America. _D. sobrina_ O.S. is widely distributed in the
United States and southern Canada, usually occurring in the
Transitional and Upper Austral life-zones. So far as known at present
it is the only species of the genus occurring on the Pacific slope. The
remaining American species (_nigripes_ O.S., _winnemana_ Alex.,
_tigrina_ Alex. and _minima_ Alex.) are Austral in distribution,
occurring in the southeastern and south central United States. A more
detailed account of the distribution of the species is given in another
paper by the writer which may be consulted (Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
Phila. for 1916, pp. 496, 497). All of the known species are generally
similar to one another in appearance and are separated by relatively
slight differences of size, color and structure.

Nothing has ever been written concerning the immature stages of this
peculiar group of crane-flies. The species described hereinafter were
reared at Lawrence, Kansas, and the general conditions under which they
occur may be briefly discussed:

North Hollow, on the Campus of the University of Kansas, is a typical
dry Austral woodland traversed by a small stream that is entirely dry
during the months of midsummer drought. The soil consists of a rich
black humus that is soft and mellow except during the period of
greatest dryness, being overlain by a varying depth of vegetable debris
and leaf-mold. It is in this relatively dry soil that the larvæ of
_Dicranoptycha_ occur. The forest cover consists of Carolina poplar,
_Populus deltoides_ Marsh; black walnut, _Juglans nigra_ L., white elm,
_Ulmus americana_ L.; Kentucky coffee-tree, _Gymnocladus dioica_ (L.)
Koch; honey locust, _Gleditsia triacanthos_ L.; red bud, _Cercis
canadensis_ L.; yellow wood, _Cladrastis lutea_ (Mx.f.) Koch;
tree-of-heaven, _Ailanthus glandulosa_ Desf., etc. The principle shrubs
are the goose-berry, _Ribes gracile_ Mx.; poison ivy, _Rhus
Toxicodendron_ L.; wahoo, _Evonymus atropurpureus_ Jacq.; bladder-nut,
_Staphylea trifolia_ L.; coral-berry, _Symphoricarpos orbiculatus_
Moench.; blackberried elder, _Sambucus canadensis_ L., etc. The herbage
is made up of tall grasses, composites and, in the spring, the
all-dominant cleavers, _Galium_. In addition to the above, great
tangles of lianas (_Smilax_, _Vitis_, _Ampelopsis_, etc.) are found.

In situations such as the above these Austral species of
_Dicranoptycha_ spend their entire lives. The first larvæ of _D.
winnemana_ were found here on March 20, 1918, by the writer and his
wife. At this time they were well grown (length 16 mm.; diameter 0.9
mm.). They occurred just beneath the cover of fallen leaves and other
debris in the upper layers of soil. Here they were associated with pupæ
of _Tipula angustipennis_ Lw., larvæ of _Sciara_ (Mycetophilidæ);
_Psilocephala hæmorrhoidalis_ Macq. (Therevidæ), numerous beetle larvæ,
centipedes, etc. By their elongate form and glabrous shiny skin they
are very characteristic and easily recognized. The glassy appearance of
the body suggests the shiny shells of a small coiled molluscan whose
dead fragments occurred in some numbers in the same situations. These
larvæ were placed in rearing and the first adults appeared in the
breeding-cages on May 6, and from that time on continued to appear in
large numbers. It was over a month later that the first individuals
were taken in the field. The pupal duration could not be determined
closer than ten days, and this may be the usual length of time required
for this stage. The first larvæ of _D. minima_ were found on July 2,
1918, in similar situations in North Hollow. At this time they were
only about one-half grown. On July 11 much larger larvæ of this species
were secured and placed in rearing, emerging as adults on July 21. The
larvæ, like these of _D. winnemana_, live just beneath the layer of
leaf-mold in the upper zone of black soil. They are usually quite
sluggish in their motions but at other times are quite active. The
larvæ are herbivores and feed on the rich organic earth in their
haunts. When ready to pupate, they encase themselves in earthen cells
(10 mm. × 3.5 mm.), firm in texture, rather thick-walled but without
silk. There is a small opening at either end. The length of the cavity
is but little greater than the pupa itself. In this cavity the pupa
rests and matures. As in other insects, the teneral pupæ are very pale
yellow but gradually darken in color until, at emergence, they are of a
dark brownish-black. When newly transformed the teneral flies rest on
the ground and on the leaves of low plants nearby.

The adult flies of _D. germana_ usually occur in the immediate
neighborhood of running or stagnant water and may be swept from the
rank vegetation in such places. The flies rest on the upper surface of
the leaves of tall herbs and low shrubs. In eastern Kansas, the flies
of _D. winnemana_, _D. tigrina_ and _D. minima_ often occur together.
In June, _D. winnemana_ appears on the wing and is found associated
with _Tipula morrisoni_ Alex., _T. mingwe_ Alex., etc.; in July, _D.
minima_ appears, together with _Tipula flavibasis_ Alex., _T.
unimaculata_ Lw., etc.; still later in July _D. tigrina_ emerges and
all three species fly together during August and into September when
they fly with _Tipula ultima_ Alex., _T. unifasciata_ Lw., etc. It is
curious that no other species of Limnobiinæ occur in the thamnophytic
association frequented by _Dicranoptycha_. All three species of this
genus as discussed above have habits that are generally similar to one
another. They are usually found resting quietly on the upper surface of
the leaves but fly readily and on slight disturbance. Pairs in
copulation are often found resting, the bodies directed away from one
another and the wings folded over the abdomen. While thus united they
fly readily, sometimes the female taking the initiative, sometimes the
rather smaller male. The eggs are deposited in the soft earth in these
situations.


NATURAL AFFINITIES

In the Monographs (1869) Osten Sacken included the genus
_Dicranoptycha_ in his tribe (section) Limnobina anomala, or, as it
subsequently became known, the Rhamphidini, and still later the
Antochini. A recent survey of the immature stages of several Antochine
genera has shown that the tribe is merely an artificial grouping based
on superficial resemblance of the adult flies. This heterogeneous
assemblage includes representatives of at least three other tribes,
_Dicranoptycha_, together with _Antocha_, _Elliptera_, _Rhamphidia_,
etc., showing an undeniable affinity with the Limnobiini, whereas
_Teucholabis_, _Elephantomyia_, etc., show an equally clear
relationship with the Eriopterini. Moreover a close phylogenetic
relationship with the lowermost subtribes of the Hexatomini (_Ularia_,
_Epiphragmaria_, etc.), is easily apparent.

_Dicranoptycha_ shows the closest affinities with _Antocha_ and
_Rhamphidia_. The larvæ of these three genera, each of which typifies a
division, show the following common characters:

Abdominal segments with basal transverse creeping welts or areas of
microscopic points. The massive compact head-capsule with the
præfrontal sclerite large, distinct, the externo-lateral plates large,
mussel-shaped and very thin. The mentum is not completely divided
medially. The maxillæ are large and of primitive structure, the
cardines and stipites distinct, the two distal lobes large, subequal in
size, covered with hairs and bearing sensory organs. Mandibles with one
or more dorsal and two or more ventral teeth in addition to the apical
point.

The differences between these allied divisions are best indicated by a
key.


LARVAE

     1. Spiracular disk with only the two long ventral lobes
        remaining; spiracles lacking or vestigial; abdominal
        segments with both dorsal and ventral welts; strictly
        aquatic.
                                                    _Antocharia._
        Spiracular disk surrounded by four or five short lobes;
        spiracles large and functional; abdominal segments with
        ventral welts only (except the dorsum of segment eight);
        terrestrial or semiaquatic.

     2. Body moderately elongated and covered with a long dark
        pubescence; spiracular disk squarely truncated,
        surrounded by five subequal stout lobes; mentum with
        five subequal teeth, the lateral one of either side not
        conspicuously reduced.
                                                  _Rhamphidaria._

        Body very long and slender, glabrous; spiracular disk
        obliquely truncated, surrounded by four slender naked
        lobes; mentum with three subequal primary teeth and a
        much reduced lateral tooth on either side.
                                              _Dicranoptycharia._


PUPAE

     1. Pronotal breathing-horns branched; aquatic.
                                                    _Antocharia._

        Pronotal breathing-horns not branched; semiaquatic or
        terrestrial.

     2. Pronotal breathing-horns distinct, elongate-cylindrical.
                                                  _Rhamphidaria._

        Pronotal breathing-horns apparently lacking, microscopic.
                                              _Dicranoptycharia._


THE SUBTRIBE DICRANOPTYCHA

A Key to the Species of Dicranoptycha


LARVAE

     1. Spiracular disk with the dark markings less extensive;
        the mark of the lateral lobes not contiguous with the
        spiracle or the triangular area on the disk; dorsal
        marking indistinct or lacking.
                                             _D. winnemana_ Alex.

        Spiracular disk with the dark markings more extensive;
        the mark of the lateral lobes suffusing the ventral inner
        margin of the spiracle and usually closely approximated
        or nearly contiguous with the triangular area on the
        disk; dorsal marking black, transversely rectangular.
                                                _D. minima_ Alex.

     Description of the Species.


DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIES

1916 _Dicranoptycha winnemana_ Alexander; Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila.,
pp. 500, 501; Pl. 25, fig. 12.

_Larva._--Length, 20-22 mm.
          Diameter, 0.9-1.1 mm.

Coloration varying from white to almost black depending on the nature
and amount of the food eaten which shows clearly through the
transparent integument. The fat-bodies likewise show through and give a
white color to the larva especially after death.

Form very elongate (fig. 1), body terete; integument very glabrous,
transparent and glassy. Prothoracic segment a little longer than the
mesothorax which, in turn, slightly exceeds the metathorax. The
intermediate abdominal segments are elongated. The basal ring of
sternites two to eight bears a transverse band or area of microscopic
chitinized spicules, the one on the eighth segment split lengthwise by
a capillary line. A similar band occurs in the same position on the
dorsum of the eighth segment but the pleural region is devoid of such a
band.

Spiracular disk (fig. 8) moderate in size, obliquely truncated,
surrounded by four lobes, a pair of small, slender, lateral lobes and
short, broader ventral lobes. The usual dorso-median lobe is lacking
but its position is indicated by a gently rounded convexity. The inner
face of the lateral lobe bears a narrow semi-lunate black mark with the
concavity toward the spiracle, the proximal end acutely pointed. The
ventral lobes bear a similar but smaller subrectangular black mark. A
pale and usually indistinct dusky mark occupies the inner face of the
dorsal lobe. On the disk between, and slightly below the level of, the
spiracles is a large brown triangular or V-shaped mark. The spiracles
are small, separated from one another by a distance equal to about 2.5
to 3 times the diameter of one; the center-piece of the spiracle is
black, the ring yellow surrounded by an outer dusky margin. Anal gills
fleshy and protuberant as a blunt ring surrounding the anus (fig. 10).

Head-capsule (fig. 2) of the compact, massive type of the Limnobiini;
præfrontal sclerite (fig. 3) large and distinct; the sclerite broad
with the sides subparallel to about midlength, thence tapering
gradually to the tip which is entire; there are two or three punctures
at the margin before midlength. Interno-lateral plates narrow, a little
longer than the præfrons; externo-lateral plates very broad, thin and
flattened with the posterior margin very obtuse and the inner ventral
portions continuous with the mental plate. Labrum (fig. 3) very broad
and extensive, flattened, pale in color, the anterior margin with about
two sense-organs. Mentum (fig. 4) deeply split behind but not
completely divided, the anterior margin with three primary teeth that
are subequal in size or the middle one a little smaller; a much reduced
lateral tooth on either side. Præmentum smaller than the hypopharynx,
in outline roughly oval or semicircular with the two labial palpi
surrounded by hairs at the base. Hypopharynx (fig. 5) consisting of two
chitinized arms that are contiguous but not fused medially, the
concavity between them filled with a rounded cushion that is covered
with tubercles arranged in more or less distinct oblique parallel rows.
Antennæ (fig. 6) two-segmented, the basal segment cylindrical with an
auditory plate on the face at beyond midlength; apical segment long and
slender, in length but slightly less than the basal segment, tapering
gradually to the bluntly rounded apex. Mandibles (fig. 7) simple with
the teeth blunt; apical point longer than the lateral teeth; dorsal
tooth single, broad, very flattened and obtusely pointed; ventral teeth
two, a little smaller than the dorsal tooth. Maxillæ (fig. 2) of a
generalized structure, the cardines distinct and feebly chitinized;
distal lobes of the organ consisting of a subequal inner and outer
lobe; the outer lobe with an abundance of long, delicate hairs and
bearing a few sensory papillæ including one larger palpiform organ.

_Pupa._--Length, 9.1-12.8 mm.
Width, d.-s., 1.6-1.8 mm.
Depth, d.-v., 1.6-1.9 mm.

Thoracic dorsum shiny light brown; in very old pupæ the color is much
darker, but still retains a much brighter color than the leg and
wing-sheaths; abdomen pale becoming darker in age, especially on the
pleura.

Cephalic crest (fig. 13) low and depressed, inconspicuous, lying
between the antennal bases which extend beyond it; there are four small
setigerous lobes, the larger pair of which are posterior in position.
Front between the eyes broad, subparallel. Two blunt tubercles on
either side of the forehead. Eyes large, with coarse ommatidia. Labrum
semicircular in outline, tumid. Labial lobes large, oval, contiguous
with one another, at the tip of the labrum. Maxillary palpi moderately
long and slender, nearly straight, gradually narrowed to the tip which
ends opposite the knee-joint of the fore legs. Antennæ with the basal
segments separated only by the cephalic crest, the sheaths ending about
opposite or a little before the lateral angle of the thorax.

Pronotal breathing-horns (fig. 14) very small, almost microscopic; when
viewed from the dorsal aspect appearing as tiny triangular tubercles.
Mesonotum moderately convex, unarmed, the V-shaped suture distinct; a
few setæ on the mesonotum, including one near the end of each scutal
lobe. Wing-sheaths rather short, but narrow, ending about opposite
midlength of the third abdominal segment. Leg-sheaths ending opposite
the base of the fifth abdominal segment, the tips of the tarsi ending
about on a common level or those of the fore legs a trifle longer.

Abdominal segments (fig. 11) subdivided into four annuli that bear
transverse bands of microscopic setæ; these bands increase in width
from the basal to the apical. Spiracles on the pleural region of
segments two to seven, lying opposite the third annulus and close to
the ventral margin of the pleura. No spiracles are discernible on the
dorsum of the eighth segment. Male cauda (fig. 11) with the ventral
lobes very blunt, rounded; the dorsal lobes very small, terminating in
a sharp spine that is directed dorsad and bears a weak seta near its
base. Female cauda (fig. 12) with the ventral lobes a little longer
than the dorsal lobes; the latter at the outer angle of the apex with a
short stout spine that is directed dorsad as in the male.

     _Nepionotype_ (type larva), Lawrence, Kansas, April 2, 1918.

     _Neanotype_ (type pupa), with the type larva, May 6, 1918.

     _Paratypes_, larvæ and pupæ, about fifty from the type
     locality, March 20 to May 20, 1918.


_Dicranoptycha minima_ Alexander.

1919 _Dicranoptycha minima_ Alexander; Ent. News, Vol. 30.

The larva is very similar to that of _D. winnemana_ as described above,
but is slightly smaller. The spiracular disk (fig. 9) has the dark
markings much more extensive. The mark of the lateral lobes is
contiguous with the spiracles and is also closely approximated to the
large triangular brown mark on the disk. There is a large transverse
rectangular mark occupying the inner face of the dorsal lobe. The
marking of the ventral lobe is about as in _D. winnemana_.

     _Nepionotype_, Lawrence, Kansas, July 11, 1918.

     _Neanotype_, Lawrence, Kansas, July 21, 1918.

     _Paratypes_, a few larvæ from the type-locality.


Explanation of the Figures

A--Labial Lobes; E--Eye; EL--Externo-lateral Plate; G--Anal Gills;
IL--Interno-lateral Plate; Lb--Labrum; M--Maxillary Palpus; P--Pronotal
Breathing-horn; Pf--Præfrons; S--Spiracle.

Fig. 1. Larva of _Dicranoptycha winnemana_, ventral aspect of body.

Fig. 2. The same, head-capsule, ventral aspect.

Fig. 3. The same, head-capsule, dorsal aspect.

Fig. 4. The same, mentum, ventral aspect.

Fig. 5. The same, hypopharynx, ventral aspect.

Fig. 6. The same, antenna.

Fig. 7. The same, mandible.

Fig. 8. Larva of _Dicranoptycha winnemana_, spiracular disk,
        dorso-caudal aspect.

Fig. 9. Larva of _D. minima_, spiracular disk, caudal aspect, the anal
        gills protruded.

Fig. 10. Larva of _D. winnemana_, spiracular disk, lateral aspect.

Fig. 11. Pupa of _D. winnemana_, lateral aspect of male.

Fig. 12. The same, lateral aspect of female cauda.

Fig. 13. The same, head and mouth-parts, ventral aspect.

Fig. 14. The same, pronotal breathing-horn, enlarged.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




The Central Nervous System of Nucula and Malletia

WILLIAM A. HILTON


These bivalve forms are grouped among the simplest of the molloscs. It
is especially from the condition in _Nucula_ as described by Pelseneer
'91, that the conception of the most anterior ganglion being composed
of four ganglia, has its chief support. Drew '01, who has also studied
_Nucula_, believes that the lobes of the ganglion in _Nucula_ are
superficial and that the four connectives coming from the ganglion may
be interpreted in another way. That is, that one pair of nerves may
represent an otocystic branch partly fused with the connective. This
view seemed reasonable to him as Stempel '99 in _Solenyma_ found the
otocystic nerves arose directly from the cerebral ganglion.

The two species of this group used for study were collected at Laguna
Beach. _Nucula castrensis_ Hinds, occurs abundantly at low tide under
rocks. It is rather small for dissection, but very good complete series
were obtained and stained in hematoxylin. _Malletia faba_ Dall, was
much less abundant. Specimens were obtained from holdfasts or from
dredging. Although this was a larger species, gross dissection was not
very easily carried out on any of the specimens, but good series were
made.

The ganglia of _Nucula_ are easily studied in section. The cerebral
mass seems composed of one main mass, partly divided into four
subdivisions, the two central most completely fused, and the lateral
quite distinct in places. The central portion might represent the
cerebral ganglia and the lateral, the pleural if we take that
interpretation. The pedal ganglion is made of right and left parts
quite completely fused except at the margins. The pedal mass is the
smallest of the three chief ganglionic areas. The visceral ganglia are
quite widely separated and a little larger than the pedal mass.

The ganglia of _Malletia_ are in general plan similar to those of
_Nucula_, the greatest differences being in the cerebral mass. The
cerebro-pleural mass seems almost one. In most sections it is very
compact and a little more complicated in structure than the ganglion of
_Nucula_. However there are two small ventral ganglionic branches or
small ganglia attached to the ventral side of the cerebral mass. These
small ganglia may represent the visceral. Farther back in a cross
section series as the cerebral mass disappears two other small branches
take origin and run parallel to the nerves from the ganglionic cords.
These two branches on each side seem to run together before the pedal
ganglia are reached. Neither of these pairs of nerves seems connected
with an otocyst.

At the cephalic end of the cerebro-pleural ganglion the large
ganglionic cords are in evidence. A little distance from the cephalic
end on the dorsal side there are quite large groups of cells down from
the surface and surrounded by nerve fibers. The course of the fibers
here is quite complex. On the ventral lateral sides of the ganglia are
paired light areas of fibers which may be traced into the fibers of the
ganglionic cords.

The pedal ganglion is small and much as in _Nucula_. The visceral
ganglia are larger and widely separated.

In both _Nucula_ and _Malletia_ young specimens were used for study. In
_Nucula_ there was more the appearance of four ganglia in the
cerebro-pleural mass, and the ganglia seem less complex than in
_Malletia_. This last species has more separate pleural ganglia, if the
ganglionic cords can be so regarded.

In neither of the species studied were all parts of the connectives
easy to follow, so it was impossible to test the suggestions of Drew,
but in both species there is some indication of two lateral lobes of
the cerebral mass, and in _Nucula_ there is good evidence of two
central ganglia as well as the smaller lateral ones. The lateral
ganglia of the cerebral mass are most clearly separated in _Malletia_.
In _Nucula_ the lateral ganglia are larger in proportion and the
distribution of the gray and white matter is more irregular.


REFERENCES

_Drew, G. A._                            1901

The life history of Nucula delphinodonta. Quart, jour. sc.
vol. 44, pt. 3.

_Pelseneer, P._                          1891

Contribution á l'étude des Lamellibranchs. Arch. d. biol. xi.

_Stempell_                               1899

Zur Anatomie von Solrmya togata. Zool. Jahrb. Bd. xiii.
(_Contribution from the Zoological Laboratory of Pomona College_)


EXPLANATION OF FIGURES

Fig. 1. Diagram of the ganglia of _Nucula castrensis_, reconstructed
from serial sections. The probable position of the connectives is shown
and the proportionate distances between ganglia are given. The upper
ganglion is the cerebro-pleural with large nerves leading off from the
ganglion which is itself lobed into four chief lobes. The pedal
ganglion is next. In section the pedal ganglion at one place seems to
be made up of four parts which may correspond to four connectives from
the cerebro-pleural although only one pair of connectives was clearly
determined. The visceral ganglion is connected with the pedal below.
×70.

Fig. 2. Cross section of cerebro-pleural ganglion. On the right side
one of the lateral ganglia is shown. The one of the other side does not
show because the section is not straight across. The dorsal side is up.
×300.

Fig. 3. Section of the pedal mass of _Nucula_, through the center. The
dorsal side is up. ×300.

Fig. 4. Left side of the visceral mass of _Nucula_. Dorsal side up.
×300.

Fig. 5. Nerve cells from the central nervous system of _Nucula_. ×450.

Fig. 6. Section through the body of _Nucula_ showing the position of
the cerebro-pleural ganglion cut through the center. Dorsal side up.
The cellular portion of the ganglion is black. ×70.

Fig. 7. Section through the body of _Nucula_ at the level of the
visceral nerves which are shown on either side of the section. The area
of nerve cells is shown in black. ×70.

Fig. 8. Reconstruction from serial sections of the cerebro-pleural mass
nerves and connectives of _Malletia faba_. The drawing is a ventral
view, the cephalic side is at the top. ×70.

Fig. 9. Reconstruction of pedal ganglion of _Malletia_ from the ventral
side. Cephalic side at the top. ×70.

Fig. 10. Reconstruction of visceral ganglia of _Malletia_. ×70.

Fig. 11. Section through cerebro-pleural mass of _Malletia_. The dorsal
side is up. On the ventral side to the left and right are the
beginnings of the lateral lobes or ganglionic cords which may represent
the pleural ganglia. In this species the cerebral ganglia are not
separated into right and left halves as in _Nucula_. ×300.

Fig. 12. Section through the central part of the pedal mass of
_Malletia_. The dorsal side is up. ×300.

Fig. 13. Section through one visceral ganglion of _Malletia_. The
dorsal side is up. ×300.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




JOURNAL OF ENTOMOLOGY AND ZOOLOGY--_Advertising Section_

_The_ Journal _of_
Zoological Research

_Edited by
WALTER E. COLLINGE, M. Sc., F. L. S., F. E. S.
The Gatty Marine Laboratory
The University, St. Andrews, Scotland_

     The subject matter is strictly confined to original
     zoological research--systematic and anatomical. Fully
     illustrated by lithographic plates and text figures.

Each volume will consist of 4 parts, price $5.

_All subscriptions should be forwarded to_

Messrs. Dulau & Co., Ltd.
37 Soho Square, London, W., England


GRIFFITH Incubators

[Illustration]

A simple, well constructed bacteriological incubator




GAGE--The Microscope

An Introduction to Microscopic Methods and to Histology

By SIMON H. GAGE.

Twelfth Edition. Entirely rewritten, and with many new illustrations.
Price, postpaid, $3.00.

This work aims to give help to everyone who uses the microscope,
whether he is a beginner or an advanced worker.


COMSTOCK--A Manual for the Study of Insects

     By JOHN HENRY COMSTOCK, Professor of Entomology in Cornell
     University, and ANNA BOTSFORD COMSTOCK, member of the
     Society of American Wood-Engravers. 8vo. cloth, IX. +701
     pages, 797 figures in the text, and six full page plates.
     Nearly all of the figures were engraved especially for this
     work. Postpaid $4.07; net $3.75.

This hand-book is designed to meet the needs of teachers in the public
schools and of students in high schools and colleges.


NEEDHAM--General Biology

A book of outlines and practical studies for the general student

     By JAMES G. NEEDHAM, Professor of Limnology and General
     Biology in Cornell University. Cloth 8vo. XIV. +542 pages;
     288 figures, mostly original. Postpaid $2.00.

This book is expressly designed to help the general student obtain a
comprehensive grasp of the principles of biology.


NEEDHAM & LLOYD--The Life of Inland Waters

A Text-Book of Freshwater Biology

     By JAMES G. NEEDHAM, Ph.D., Professor of Limnology and
     General Biology in Cornell University, and JOHN T. LLOYD,
     A.B., Assistant in Limnology in Cornell University.

This book is a broad presentation of the field of fresh-water biology,
primarily in its scientific aspects, also in its relation to
commercial, civic, aesthetic and public health interests of man. There
is no book in the English language covering the field. Copiously
illustrated with photographs from Nature. 438 pages; 244 figures. Price
$3.00.


GAGE--Optic Projection

     By SIMON HENRY GAGE, Professor Emeritus of Histology and
     Embryology in Cornell University, and Henry Phelps Gage, Ph.D.

This work of over 700 pages and with over 400 figures is of especial
interest to workers in all fields of Biology in that it deals
especially with the use of the Projection Microscope for demonstrations
and for drawing. It also gives the fundamental principles of all the
forms of projection. A 16-page circular will be sent on request.
Postpaid, $3.00.


RILEY--Handbook of Medical Entomology

     By WM. A. RILEY, Ph.D., Professor of Insect Morphology and
     Parasitology in Cornell University and O. A. JOHANNSEN, Ph.D.,
     Professor of Biology in Cornell University.

A concise account of poisonous, and disease-carrying insects and their
allies, including descriptions and illustrations of the principal
species, with keys for their determination, and method of control.
Bound Library Buckram, medium 8vo. Nearly 375 pages. Price $2.00 net.


_Send for Descriptive Circular_

The Comstock Publishing Company Cornell Heights, Ithaca, N. Y.




THE "ALL GLASS MOUNT"

for _Lepidoptera_ and other insects

[Illustration: _Odontolabis wollastoni, Java_]

We are able at last to offer our customers an all glass mount that we
believe comes nearer to meeting the requirements of museums and private
collectors than any previously put on the market.

No cut can properly show this mount, which must be seen to be
appreciated. Write for Circular 192, which describes fully what we are
offering.

When in need of Entomological supplies remember that we have the best
insect pins on the market and that our hand made Schmitt insect boxes
with three ply tops and bottoms are unsurpassed. Catalogue No. 33 free
on application.

Prompt shipments can be made from our large stock of United States and
exotic insects of all orders. We also prepare 150 different
metamorphoses of beneficial and injurious insects. Pupae now on hand
are listed in circular No. 198. Other circulars and price lists free
upon request.

Ward's Natural Science Establishment
84-102 College Ave.   Rochester, N. Y.




Entomological News

     A forty-eight page illustrated magazine, published monthly
     except August and September, devoted to the study of INSECT
     LIFE. It contains a list of the titles of the current
     Entomological Literature, and also articles by the leading
     Entomologists in the United States and Canada. Valuable
     information for the beginner, the economic entomologist and
     the systematist.

To new subscribers, $1.90; Renewals, $2.00; payable in advance.
Single copies 25 cents. Address

ENTOMOLOGICAL NEWS
1900 RACE STREET, PHILADELPHIA, PA.


CLASS WORK MATERIAL
CAN BE PROCURED AT ANY TIME OF
THE YEAR FROM

C. S. BRIMLEY, Zoologist

1135 Newberne Avenue
RALEIGH, N. C., U. S. A.

Twenty-one years' experience            Price List on Application


The Journal of Parasitology

A Quarterly Devoted to Medical Zoology

This journal will be a medium for the prompt publication of briefer
papers and research notes on animal parasites. Emphasis laid on the
morphology, life history and biology of zooparasites and the relations
of animals to disease.

Subscription, $2.00 a Volume

Managing Editor, HENRY B. WARD;
Univ. Illinois, Urbana, Illinois


Do Business by Mail

It's profitable, with accurate lists of prospects. Our catalogue
contains vital information on Mail Advertising. Also prices and
quantity on 6,000 national mailing lists, 99% guaranteed. Such as:

War Material Mfrs.
Cheese Box Mfrs.
Shoe Retailers
Tin Can Mfrs.
Druggists
Auto Owners
Wealthy Men
Ice Mfrs.
Doctors
Axle Grease Mfrs.
Railroad Employees
Contractors
Fly Paper Mfrs.
Foundries
Farmers
Fish Hook Mfrs.
Feather Duster Mfrs.
Hotels

Write for this valuable reference book.

Ross-Gould, 1027H Olive Street, St. Louis.

Ross-Gould
Mailing
Lists

St. Louis




Pomona College

Located in one of the most healthful and beautiful parts of the west
coast. The mountains reach an elevation of ten thousand feet within a
few miles of the college and these with the nearby ocean afford many
special advantages for the study of things not in books. Special
advantages are afforded by the fact that the college limits its
attendance, the freshman class being restricted to two hundred
applicants. The success of the college is particularly indicated by the
large proportion of the graduates who proceed to advanced work in the
large universities. In addition, well-manned departments of music and
art afford exceptional advantages.

For further information, address

SECRETARY OF POMONA COLLEGE
Claremont, California

       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes


Page 64: Changed * * * to ... (preferred form for ellipsis).
  Originally: This * * * is readily overcome by the frequent

Page 64: Changed "placd" to "placed".
  Originally: surface of the book on which it was placd,

Page 68: Changed "X" to "×".
  Originally: cells (10 mm. X 3.5 mm.)

Page 70: Changed "chitinizd" to "chitinized".
  Originally: Changed area of microscopic chitinizd spicules,

Page 71: Changed "Lengh" to "Length".
  Originally: Pupa.--Lengh, 9.1-12.8 mm.

Page 75: Retained "molloscs", as a possible spelling variant for
"molluscs". However, it may be a typo.
  Originally: forms are grouped among the simplest of the molloscs.

Pages 75, 76: Retained "Stempel" and "Stempell" spelling variations.

Page 76: Changed "once" to "one".
  Originally: the pedal ganglion at once place seems to be made up

Page 76: Changed all instances of "X" to "×" to indicate magnification.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Journal of Entomology and Zoology, by 
Horace Gunthorp and Charles P. Alexander and W. A. Hilton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF ENTOMOLOGY AND ZOOLOGY ***

***** This file should be named 37632-8.txt or 37632-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/6/3/37632/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
