Project Gutenberg's Self-Instructor in the Art of Hair Work, by Mark Campbell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Self-Instructor in the Art of Hair Work
       Dressing Hair, Making Curls, Switches, Braids, and Hair
       Jewelry of Every Description.

Author: Mark Campbell

Release Date: January 24, 2012 [EBook #38658]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELF-INSTRUCTOR IN ART OF HAIR WORK ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)











SELF-INSTRUCTOR

IN THE

ART OF HAIR WORK,

DRESSING HAIR,

MAKING CURLS, SWITCHES, BRAIDS,

AND

HAIR JEWELRY OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.


Compiled from Original Designs and the Latest Parisian Patterns

BY

MARK CAMPBELL.


    NEW YORK:
    M. CAMPBELL, 737 BROADWAY.

    CHICAGO:
    81 SOUTH CLARK STREET.

    MDCCCLXVII.




    Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1867, by

    MARK CAMPBELL,

    In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States,
            for the Northern
    District of Illinois.




PREFACE.


The necessity for a comprehensive work, giving a full and detailed
explanation of the Art of manufacturing Hair Work in all its various
branches, has been so frequently urged upon the attention of the author,
that, in compliance with an almost universal demand, he has concluded to
publish a book which will clearly illustrate the Art of Hair Dressing,
and making Hair Jewelry and Hair Work of every description. His perfect
familiarity with the business--the result of many years' successful
experience--renders him eminently competent to impart the fullest
information upon the subject of which he treats, while the great
consumption and rapidly increasing demand for every description of Hair
Goods, will make this work he now presents to the public, one of
particular interest to all classes. Heretofore the Art of making these
goods has been zealously guarded by a few dealers, who have accumulated
fortunes, and would still retain it a profound secret but for the
publication of this book. This is the only descriptive volume ever
published on Hair Work. It is an elaborate, carefully prepared book,
containing over one thousand drawings, devices and diagrams, engraved at
great expense to the publisher, and accompanied with the most
comprehensive instructions. It not only reveals to the most ordinary
comprehension the hitherto concealed mysteries of the Art, but will
prove an indispensable adjunct to every lady's toilet table, as by its
aid she will not only be able to dress her own hair in every variety of
style, but make her own Hair Jewelry and articles of Hair work,
including Switches, Braids, Curls, Waterfalls, &c., assisted by a
reference to plates of the most modern European and American styles. For
children, no art or accomplishment is more useful than the ability to
make articles of tasteful ornament in Hair Work. This work will open to
all such persons a path to agreeable and profitable occupation. Jewelry
Dealers, from the clear instructions herein given, can manufacture any
required pattern of Hair Jewelry, and add, without extra expense, a new
and lucrative branch to their business.

Persons wishing to preserve and weave into lasting mementos, the hair of
a deceased father, mother, sister, brother, or child, can also enjoy the
inexpressible advantage and satisfaction of _knowing_ that the material
of their own handiwork is the actual hair of the "loved and gone."

No other work ever met with such an earnest demand as this treatise upon
the art of Hair Braiding. It must certainly commend itself to the ladies
of our country as invaluable. Even a hasty perusal will convince every
one of its utility and worth. Translations in French and German are in
progress.

[Illustration]




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


IN this book of instruction, I have introduced for practice the easiest
braids first--which are chain braids. The first pattern, found on page
9, is a very easy and handsome one, and should be practiced to
perfection before trying any other, as it will enable the beginner to
execute all others after the first is perfected. A new beginner should
be particular to place the strands correctly upon the table, and mark
the cover with precision, after the manner shown in the diagram. I have,
by the introduction of plates, diagrams and explanatory remarks, made
comprehensive and simple the execution of all the braids herein
contained. The novice should first give special attention to preparing
the hair for braiding, the adjustment of it to the bobbins, weights,
molds, &c., of which plates, and full explanations are to be found
elsewhere in this book. I wish to impress upon the mind of the worker,
that every change made with the strands changes the numbers of them to
correspond with the numbers on the table. For example: lift No. 1 over
No. 2, which would make No. 1 No. 2, and No. 2 No. 1, &c.

[Illustration: BRAIDING TABLE AND POSITION IN BRAIDING.]




SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1,--one in each hand--lift them over
the table, one on each side of the mold, and lay them between Nos. 1 at
B, and bring back the Nos. 2 from B, one on each side of the mold, and
lay them between Nos. 2 at A; then go to C, lift Nos. 1 over between
Nos. 1 at D, passing one strand each side of the mold, and bring back
Nos. 2 from D, and lay between Nos. 2 at C. Then you are through the
braid, ready to commence at A, as at first, and repeat until finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a mold, made of small wire, with a hole in one end like
the eye of a needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the
wire. When you have it braided, take off the weights, tie the ends fast
on the wire, and push the braid tight together; then boil in water about
ten minutes, and take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until quite dry; then slip it off the wire on to the
cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and put a little
shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use elastic
cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the number of hairs in a
strand.




REVERSE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands and place on table like pattern. Commence at A with
sixty hairs in a strand. Take Nos. 2, lift over table to B, lay them in
between Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B, and lay in between
Nos. 1 at A. Then walk around table to C; take Nos. 1 and lift over
table and lay them in between Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D
to C; then take Nos. 2 at C, lift over table and lay them inside of Nos.
2 at D, and bring back Nos. 2 from D to C. After braiding several times
round to suit your taste, say five, reverse the braid by commencing at
C, and braiding as you did at A, by taking Nos. 2 at C, lift over table
to D, and lay them in between Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 2 from D,
and lay in between Nos. 1 at C. Then go to A and take Nos. 1, lift over
table and lay in between Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A,
then take Nos. 2 at A, lift over table and lay in between Nos. 2 at B,
and fetch back Nos. 2 from B to A, then commence at C again and braid
five times. Then commence at A as you did at first, reversing it every
time you braid it five times through. Braid it over a small wire, tie
the ends on the wire, boil and dry the same as chain on page nine, only
you need not press the braid together on the wire.

[Illustration]




SIXTEEN TWIST CHAIN.


TAKE sixteen strands, with eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A and B; take No. 1 at A in right hand, and
No. 1 at B in left hand, and swing them around the table to the right,
changing places with them. Then take Nos. 1 at C and D and change as at
A and B. Then go to B and take Nos. 2 at B and A, and change them by
taking No. 2 at B in right hand and No. 2 at A in left hand, and swing
them around table to the right as before, changing places with them.
Then go around the table to D, and take Nos. 2 at D and C, and change
places as before, then take Nos. 3 at A and B and change as before. Then
take Nos. 3 at C and D and change places with them. Then take Nos. 4 at
B and A and change as before. Then take Nos. 4 at D and C and change as
before. Then commence at A, as at first, repeating until the braid is
finished.

[Illustration]




STRIPED SNAKE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands with twelve hairs in a strand, or any number
that can be divided by four, and sixty strands for usual size, and place
them on table like pattern. Have every alternate two strands of black
hair, and the others of light hair. Commence at A, taking two strands of
light hair in left hand, Nos. 1 and 2, and take two strands of black
hair in right hand, Nos. 3 and 4, and cross No. 2 (light) over No. 3
(dark), then No. 1 (light) under No. 3 (dark), then No. 4 (dark) over
Nos. 1 and 2 (light); so on around the table to the right until you get
to A; then commence and work back to the left by taking light hair in
left hand and dark hair in right hand, as before, and put No. 3 (dark)
over No. 2 (light), and No. 4 (dark) under No. 2 (light), and No. 1
(light) over Nos. 3 and 4 (dark), so on around the table till you get to
A; then commence as at first, so on, braiding first one way around the
table then the other till you have the chain completed.

[Illustration]

Braid it over wood, or brass wire, the size and length you wish your
chain. When braided take off your weights, tie the ends fast and boil
and dry, then take out the mold and put a cord through with some cotton
wrapped around it so it will be soft and pliable. This is called the
STRIPED SNAKE BRAID, and can be braided all of one color if desired.




CABLE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by two, eighty hairs in a
strand, twenty strands for usual size, place on table like pattern.
Commencing, take No. 1 at A in right hand and No. 1 at B in left hand,
and swing around the table to the right, and lay the one in right hand
at No. 1 at B, and the one in left hand at No. 1 at A; then bring back
No. 2 at B with right hand, and No. 2 at A in left hand, to the left,
then take No. 3 and swing to the right, then No. 4 and swing to the
left, so on, round first to the right then to the left, with every
number of strands till you get to No. 1; then commence as at first, and
so on till the chain is as long as required.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together on the wire; boil in water about ten
minutes, then take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip off
the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




SNAKE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands, or any number that can be divided by four,
twelve hairs in a strand, and sixty strands for usual size; place them
on table like pattern. Commence at A, lift No. 2 in your right hand, and
put your left under your right hand and take up No. 3 and bring it back
of No. 1, and lay them both down; then take No. 4 up and lay it between
Nos. 1 and 2, then take the next four to the right, and so on till you
get around the table; then commence and braid back around the table to
the left, but reverse the braid by braiding it this way: lift No. 3 with
your left hand, pass your right under and take No. 2 and bring it back
over No. 4, and lay them both down; then take No. 1 and lift it over in
between Nos. 3 and 4, and so on, till you get around the table. Then
commence as at first, braid one way, then the other, till you have it as
long as required. Braid it over wood or brass wire the size and length
you wish your chain; when braided take off your weights, tie the ends
fast, and boil and dry them; take out the mold and put a cord through
with some cotton wrapped around it so that it will be soft and pliable.
This is called the SNAKE CHAIN BRAID.

[Illustration]




EIGHT SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the
table like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 strands, lift across the
table and lay down inside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B
to A, then lift Nos. 2 at A over inside Nos. 2 at B and bring Nos. 2
from B to A, then lift Nos. 3 from A to B, and bring back Nos. 3 from B
to A, then lift Nos. 4 from A to B and bring back Nos. 4 from B to A,
then commence at Nos. 1 again and repeat until the chain is completed.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of an
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




HALF-TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands or any number that can be divided by two, usually
eighty hairs in a strand. Commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right
hand, and No. 1 at B in left hand, and swing them around table to right,
and lay the one in right hand down at B across over No. 2, and the one
in right hand lay down across over No. 2 at A; then go to C and D, and
change No. 1 as before at A and B; then go to the next two strands and
change as before, so on around the table, taking the next two each time
until the chain is completed. Directions same as on page 9.

[Illustration]




SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 across table and lay in between Nos.
1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then go to C, take Nos. 1 and
lift across table and lay in between Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1
from D to C; then go to A, take Nos. 2 and lift across inside of Nos. 2
at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then go to C, lift Nos. 2
across inside of Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 2 from D to C; then go
to A and commence as at first, and repeat until it is the required
length.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid close together; then boil in water about ten minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire on to the cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and
put a little shellac on the ends to keep it fast. If you want it
elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the
number of hairs in a strand.




CABLE TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on table
like pattern. Commence at A and B with Nos. 1, passing them around table
to the right, and leave No. 1 from A at B, and No. 1 from B at A. Then
take Nos. 7 at A and B, and pass around table to right, and leave the
one from A at B, and the one from B at A. Then take Nos. 2 at A and B,
changing places with them; then take Nos. 8 and change as before; then
take Nos. 3 at A and B and change them as before; then take Nos. 1 at A
and B and change as at first; then take Nos. 4 and change as before;
then take Nos. 2 and change as before; then take Nos. 5 and change as
before, so on until the braid is finished, all the time taking the third
strand to the right, or forward, and the second one to the left, or
backward.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE eighteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A and B, take Nos. 1 and swing around table to the
right, and place the No. 1 from A over the Nos. 2 and 3 at B, and the
No. 1 from B over the Nos. 2 and 3 at A; then go to C and D, take the
Nos. 1 and change the same; then go to E and F and change the same; then
go to B and A, and change as at first,--all the time taking the Nos. 1,
and swinging to the right, for when you lay them over the Nos. 2 and 3
it makes them Nos. 3, and makes Nos. 2 Nos. 1--and so on, until the
chain is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid close together; then boil in water about ten minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire on to the cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and
put a little shellac on the ends to keep it fast. If you want it
elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the
number of hairs in a strand.




TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on table
like pattern. Commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand and No.
1 at B in left hand and swing them around the table to the right and lay
the one in the right hand down at B, over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4, and
the one in the left hand at A over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4, then go to C
and take No. 1 at C and D and change as before at A and B; then go to B
and take No. 1 at B and A and change them by taking No. 1 at B in right
hand, and No. 1 at A in left hand and swing them round the table to the
right as before, laying them across over Nos. 2, 3 and 4; so on braiding
around the table to the right until you have it the required length.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




RIB CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 2 and lift over across table
outside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A outside of
Nos. 1 at A, then take Nos. 1 at C and cross over inside of Nos. 1 at D,
and bring back Nos. 2 from D inside of Nos. 2 at C, then go back to A
and braid as before, so on repeating until it is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE ten strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the table
like pattern. Commence at A and B, take Nos. 1 and swing them around the
table to the right, and leave No. 1 from A at B and the No. 1 from B at
A, then take the Nos. 2 and swing them around the table to the right and
change places with each other, then take Nos. 3 and change places as
before; then take Nos. 4 and change places as before; then take Nos. 5
and change places as before; then commence at Nos. 1 and repeat until
the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




HALF TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, seventy-five hairs in a strand, and place on the
table like pattern. Commence at A take Nos. 1 and 2, lift across the
table to B, and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and lay No. 2 between Nos. 1
and 2, and bring back Nos. 1 and 2 from B to A, and lay No. 1 outside of
No. 4, and No. 2 outside of No. 1 at A; then go to C and take Nos. 1 and
2, lift over table to D and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and lay No. 2
between Nos. 1 and 2, and bring back Nos. 1 and 2 from C, and lay No. 1
outside of No. 4, and No. 2 outside of No. 1 at C; then go to B and
change the same, and so on around the table to the right until the braid
is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




CABLE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty strands, seventy-five hairs in a strand, place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 over across the table inside of Nos.
1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A, cross
over and lay them between Nos. 2 at B, and carry back Nos. 2 from B to
A; then take Nos. 3 at A, cross over inside of Nos. 3 at B, and bring
back Nos. 3 from B to A; then take Nos. 4 at A and cross over inside of
Nos. 4 at B, and bring back Nos. 4 from B to A; then take Nos. 5 at A,
cross over inside of Nos. 5 at B, and bring back Nos. 5 from B to A;
then take Nos. 1 at B, cross over inside of Nos. 1 at A, and bring back
Nos. 1 from A to B; then take Nos. 2 at B and cross over inside of Nos.
2 at A, and bring back Nos. 2 from A to B; then take Nos. 3, so on
around the table to the right until the braid is finished, all the time
taking the next two.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




SIXTEEN SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands, fifty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 across inside of Nos. 1 at B,
and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then change at C and D, E and F, and
G and H the same, then go to A, lift Nos. 2 across in place of Nos. 2 at
B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then change at C and D, E and F,
and G and H the same. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence
at A, as at first, repeating the changes until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid close together; then boil in water about ten minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire on to the cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and
put a little shellac on the ends to keep it fast. If you want it
elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the
number of hairs in a strand.




GERMAN TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the
table like pattern. Commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand
and No. 1 at B in left hand, and swing them around to the right and
change places with them; then take No. 1 at C in right hand and No. 1 at
D in left hand, and swing around table to the right and change places as
before; then take No. 2 at B in right hand and No. 2 at A in left hand
and swing to the right and change as before; then take No. 2 at D in
right hand and No. 2 at C in left hand and swing to the right and change
as before; then take No. 3 at A in right hand and No. 3 at B in left
hand and change as before; then take No. 3 at C in right hand and No. 3
at D in left hand and change as before; then take No. 4 at B in right
hand and No. 4 at A in left hand and change as before then take No. 4 at
D in right hand and No. 4 at C in left hand and change as before. Then
commence at A as at first and repeat till the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

For further directions see page 9.




FANCY SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A--change Nos. 1 at A across inside of Nos. 1
at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A, then go to C, change Nos. 1
across inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C, then
take Nos. 1 at E in right hand and No. 1 at F in left hand, lift across
table in place of Nos. 1 at G and H, and bring back Nos. 1 from G and H
to F and E; then take Nos. 2 at E and F and change across to G and H,
and lay in place of Nos. 2, and bring back Nos. 2 from G and H to F and
E; then take Nos 3 and change across to G and H as before; then take
Nos. 4 at F and E and change across to G and H as before; then go to C
and change the Nos. 1 across to D, and bring the Nos. 1 from D to C;
then go to A and change the Nos. 1 across to B, and bring back Nos. 1
from B to A; then go to E and H, take No. 4 at H in right hand, and No.
4 at E in left hand, and lift across in place of Nos. 4 at F and G, and
bring back Nos. 4 from F and G to E and H; then take Nos. 3 at E and H
and change across in place of Nos. 3 at F and G, and bring back Nos. 3
from F and G to E and H; then take Nos. 2 at E and H and change across
in place of Nos. 2 at F and G and bring back Nos. 2 from F and G to E
and H; then take Nos. 1 at E and H, and change across in place of Nos. 1
at F and G, and bring back Nos. 1 from F and G to E and H; then go to A
and commence as at first, and repeat till the chain is finished.

[Illustration]

For further directions see page 9.




FANCY SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 across inside of No. 1 at B,
and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then change Nos. 1 at C and D the
same; then change Nos. 1 at E and F the same; then go to A, lift Nos. 2
across to B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then change Nos. 2 at C
and D the same; then change Nos. 2 at E and F the same, and you are
through the braid ready to commence at A as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If
you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the
table like pattern. Commence at A, change the Nos. 1 across inside of
Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take No. 2 at A
change over in place of Nos. 2 at B and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A;
then go to C, and change the Nos. 1 from C to D, and bring back Nos. 1
from D to C; then take Nos. 2 at C and change over in place of Nos. 2 at
D, and bring back Nos 2 from D to C; then go to A and begin as at first,
repeating until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry, then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




FANCY TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands, fifty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Change Nos. 1 at A across inside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring
back Nos. 1 from B to A; then change in the same way, successively, the
Nos. 3, 5, 2, 4, 6, 3, 5, 7, 4, 6, 8, 5, 7, 1, 6, 8, 2, 7, 1, 3, 8, 2,
4--then you are through, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire, then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




FANCY TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and lay on table like
pattern. Commence at A and B--take No. 1 at A in left hand and No. 1 at
B in right hand, swing around table to the left, and change places with
them; then take No. 7 at B in right hand and No. 7 at A in left hand,
and swing around the table to the right and change places with them;
then take No. 5 at A in right hand and No. 5 at B in left hand, and
swing around the table to the left, and change places as before; then
take No. 8 at A in right hand and No. 8 at B in left hand and swing
around table to the left and change as before; then take No. 6 at A in
left hand, and No. 6 at B in right hand and swing around table to the
right and change as before; then take No. 4 at A in right hand and No. 4
at B in left hand, and swing around table to the left and change as
before; then take No. 7 at A in right hand and No. 7 at B in left hand,
swing around table to the left and change as before, then take No. 5 at
A in left hand and No. 5 at B in right hand, swing around table to the
right and change as before; then take No. 3 at A in right hand and No. 3
at B in left hand and swing around table to the left and change as
before; then take No. 6 at A in right hand and No. 6 at B in left hand
and swing around table to the left and change as before; then take No. 4
at A in left hand and No. 4 at B in right hand and swing around table
to the right and change as before; then take No. 2 at A in right hand
and No. 2 at B in left hand and swing around table to the left and
change as before; then take No. 5 at A in right hand and No. 5 at B in
left hand and swing around table to the left and change as before, then
take No. 3 at A in left hand and No. 3 at B in right hand, and swing
around table to the right and change as before. Then commence at A as at
first.

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




DOUBLE TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE eighteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A and B--take No. 1 at A in right hand and No. 1 at
B in left hand and swing them around the table to the right and change
places with them; then change the Nos. 8, 6 and 4 the same way; then
count back five to the left (not counting the one last braided),
bringing you to No. 9--swing as before to the right and change places;
then change the Nos. 7, 5 and 3 the same way; then count back five,
bringing you to No. 8--change the same; and so on, first counting two
forward and change three times, and then count five back and change the
same, so on until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




FANCY CABLE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the
table like pattern. Commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand
and No. 1 at B in left hand, and swing them around to the left and
change places with them; then take successively Nos. 3, 5, 2, 4, 6, 3,
5, 7, 4, 6, 8, and change the same; then commence as at first with No.
1, so on repeating until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




HALF SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty four strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and arrange like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and lay them in the place of Nos. 1
at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at C and lay
in the place of Nos. 2 at D and bring back Nos. 2 from D to C. Then take
the Nos. 3 from H and lay between the Nos. 3 at G, and bring back the
Nos. 3 from G to H; then take the Nos. 4 at H and place between the Nos.
4 at G, and bring back the Nos. 4 from G to H; then take Nos. 5 at E and
place between Nos. 5 at F, and bring back the Nos. 5 from F to E; then
take the Nos. 6 at E and place them inside of Nos. 6 at F, and bring
back the Nos. 6 from F to E. Commence at A as at first, and repeat until
the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




TWELVE SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, and place on table like pattern. Commence at
A, take Nos. 1 and place between Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from
B and lay in place of Nos. 1 at A; then change the Nos. 2 at A, and B
the same way; then change the succeeding numbers, 3, 4, 5 and 6, all the
same way. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence at Nos. 1
again, as at first, and repeat until the braid is the desired length.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid close together; then boil in water about ten minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire on to the cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and
put a little shellac on the ends to keep it fast. If you want it
elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the
number of hairs in a strand.




FLAT TWIST CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE eight strands, ninety hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence, take No. 1 at A in right hand, and No. 1 at B in left
hand, and swing around table to the right--the No. 1 in the right hand
over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4 at B, and the No. 1 in the left hand over
across Nos. 2, 3 and 4 at A; repeat until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




RIB CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the
table like pattern. Commence at A, take both No. 1 strands and cross
over in between Nos. 1 on the opposite side to B, then bring back both
Nos. 2 from B to A, and place them in between Nos. 2; then walk around
table to C and braid it across table to D as before. Then commence at A
and repeat until braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




FANCY CABLE CHAIN BRAID


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by two, eight hairs in a
strand, and place on table like pattern. Commence by taking No. 1 at A
and B and change places by swinging them to the right; then take No. 2
at A and B and change places with them by swinging to the left; then
take No. 3 at A and B and change places by swinging them to the right;
then Nos. 4, and change places by swinging them to the left, and so on,
swinging to the right and left alternately, until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




SQUARE CABLE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by two, eighty hairs in a
strand, and place on table like pattern. Commence at A and B, take Nos.
1 and swing them around table to the right--No. 1 from A around to B
across No. 2 at B, and No. 1 from B across No. 2 at A; then take Nos. 1
at C and D and change as before; then change the same at E and F and at
B and A, so on around the table to the right until the chain is
completed. Any number of strands can be used by increasing the number in
each place, or by having three, four, five or six in a place, care being
taken to cross all the strands. For instance, there are four strands,
No. 1 must be crossed over all as you braid around the table. By adding
strands a different braid is formed.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




FOB CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, cross No. 1 in the right hand over the No. 1 in
the left hand, and then go to B and cross No. 1 in the left hand over
No. 1 in the right hand; then go back to A and take Nos. 1 and cross
inside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos.
2 and change the same; then change Nos. 3 the same; then go to C and
take Nos. 1 and cross inside of Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from
D and lay inside of Nos. 2 at C; then commence at A as at first, and
repeat until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




SQUARE RIBBED CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence take No. 1 at A in right hand and No. 1 at B in left
hand, swing to the right and change places with them; then take Nos. 3
at A and lay inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring Nos. 3 from B and lay
inside of Nos. 2 at A; then go to C and take No. 1 in right hand and No.
1 at D in left hand, swing to the right and change places with them;
then take Nos. 3 at C and lay inside of Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos.
3 from D and lay inside of Nos. 2 at C. Then commence at A as at first,
and repeat until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry, then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




DOUBLE LOOP CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, sixty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A and B: take Nos. 1 at A, and lift them
across the table, and lay the one in left hand between Nos. 1 at B, and
the one in right hand on the outside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back the
Nos. 1 from B to A. Then pass round the table to the right, and change
(in the same manner) successively, the Nos. 3, 5, 6, 2, 4, 6, 2, 4, 5,
1, 3 and 5; then commence at A with Nos. 1, as at first, and repeat
until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid close together; then boil in water about ten minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire on to the cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and
put a little shellac on the ends to keep it fast. If you want it
elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the
number of hairs in a strand.




KNOT CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands with fifty hairs in a strand, and place them on
table like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 4 and lift over across
table, and lay outside of Nos. 1 at B, then bring back Nos. 4 from B and
lay outside of Nos. 1 at A; then take Nos. 3 at A and lift over across
table and lay outside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 3 from B and
lay outside of Nos. 1 at A; then change Nos. 2 at A and B the same; then
take Nos. 1 and change the same; then go to D and change the same as at
A; then go to B and change the same; then go to C and change the same,
and you are ready to commence again at A, as at first: repeat until
braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




DOUBLE RIB CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands, sixty hairs in a strand and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 4 and lift over table and lay outside
of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 4 from B and lay outside of Nos. 1
at A; then go to D and change the Nos. 4 the same as at A and B; then go
to B and change the same as at A; then go to C and change the same way,
and then to A and change as at first, and so on, repeating the changes
until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid close together; then boil in water about ten minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire on to the cord, sew the ends of the braid so it will not slip, and
put a little shellac on the ends to keep it fast. If you want it
elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the
number of hairs in a strand.




FANCY CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, change Nos. 1 across inside of Nos. 1 at B, and
bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A and change across
inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then go to C
and change the Nos. 1 and the Nos. 2 across with the numbers at D the
same as at A; then return to A and commence as at first and repeat ten
times. Then change the figures on the table to correspond with the
following diagram:

[Illustration]

Then commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand and No. 1 at B
in left hand, and swing around the table to the right, changing places
with them; then take Nos. 1 at C and D and change the same; then change
Nos. 2 at B and A the same; then change the Nos. 2 at D and C the same;
then take Nos. 3 at A and B and change the same; then change the Nos. 3
at C and D; then the Nos. 4 at B and A; then the Nos. 4 at P and C; then
commence at A as at first, and repeat ten times, so on braiding
alternately ten rounds by the directions of each pattern until the braid
is finished.




FANCY CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, change Nos. 1 across inside of Nos. 1 at B, and
bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A and change across
inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then go to C
and change the Nos. 1 and the Nos. 2 across with the numbers at D the
same as at A; then return to A and commence as at first and repeat ten
times. Then change the figures on the table to correspond with the
following diagram:

[Illustration]

Then commence at A, take Nos. 1 and 2, lift across table to B and lay
No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2 between Nos. 1 and 2, and bring back
Nos. 1 and 2 from B to A, and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2
outside of No. 1 at A; then go to C and take Nos. 1 and 2 and lift over
table to D, and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2 between Nos. 1 and
2, and bring back Nos. 1 and 2 from C and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4 and
No. 2 outside of No. 1 at C; then go to B and change the same, and so on
around the table to the right, braiding alternately ten rounds by each
diagram until the braid is finished.




FANCY CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on table
like pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 over across the table and lay
them in between Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then go
to C and change the Nos. 1 across with the Nos. 1 at D the same; then
take Nos. 2 at A and change across inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back
Nos. 2 from B to A; then change the Nos. 2 at C across inside of Nos. 2
at D the same; then commence at A as at first, and repeat ten times.
Then change the numbers on table to correspond with the following
pattern or diagram:

[Illustration]

Then commence at A, take Nos. 1 and 2, lift across table to B and lay
No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2 between Nos. 1 and 2, and bring back
Nos. 1 and 2 from B to A, and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2
outside of No. 1 at A; then go to C and take Nos. 1 and 2 and lift over
table to D, and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2 between Nos. 1 and
2, and bring back Nos. 1 and 2 from C and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4 and
No. 2 outside of No. 1 at C; then go to B and change the same, and so on
around the table to the right, braiding alternately ten rounds by each
diagram until the braid is finished.




FANCY CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on the
table like pattern. Commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand
and No. 1 at B in left hand, swing around the table to the right and
change places with them; then take Nos. 1 at C and D and change as at A
and B; then change Nos. 2 at B and A the same; then change the Nos. 2 at
D and C the same; then take Nos. 3 at A and B and change the same; then
change the Nos. 3 at C and D; then the Nos. 4 at B and A, and also the
Nos. 4 at D and C, all the time swinging to the right. Braid around ten
times.

[Illustration]

Then commence at A, take Nos. 1 and 2, lift across table to B and lay
No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2 between Nos. 1 and 2, and bring back
Nos. 1 and 2 from B to A, and lay No. 1 outside of No. 4, and No. 2
outside of No. 1 at A; then change the same at C, B and D; then commence
again at A and braid ten rounds, so on braiding alternately ten rounds
by the directions of each pattern until the braid is finished.




FANCY CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, change Nos. 1 across inside of Nos. 1 at B, and
bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A and change across
inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then go to C
and change the Nos. 1 and the Nos. 2 across with the numbers at D the
same as at A; then return to A and commence as at first and repeat ten
times. Then change the figures on the table to correspond with the
following diagram:

[Illustration]

Then commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand and No. 1 at B
in left hand, and swing them around the table to the right, and lay the
one in right hand down at B over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4, and the one in
left hand at A over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4; then go to C and change the
Nos. 1 at B and D the same; then go to B and change the Nos. 1 at B and
A the same; so on, braiding around the table to the right, alternately
braiding ten rounds by the directions of each pattern until the braid is
finished.




FANCY CHAIN BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place them on table
like pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 over across the table and lay
them in between Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then go
to C and change the Nos. 1 across with the Nos. 1 at D the same; then
take Nos. 2 at A and change across inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back
Nos. 2 from B to A; then change the Nos. 2 at C across inside of Nos. 2
at D the same; then commence at A as at first, and repeat ten times.
Then change the numbers on table to correspond with the following
pattern or diagram:

[Illustration]

Then commence at A and B, take No. 1 at A in right hand and No. 1 at B
in left hand, and swing them around the table to the right, and lay the
one in right hand down at B over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4, and the one in
left hand at A over across Nos. 2, 3 and 4; then go to C and change the
Nos. 1 at B and D the same; then go to B and change the Nos. 1 at B and
A the same; so on, braiding around the table to the right, alternately
braiding ten rounds by the directions of each pattern until the braid is
finished.




DOUBLE RIB CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-six strands, sixty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A and B, take Nos. 1 and change places by
swinging them around the table to the left; then take the third strands
to the right of A and B, and change places by swinging them around the
table to the right; then take the fourth strands to the right of the
ones last taken, and change places by swinging them around the table to
the left, and so on working around the table to the right; first
swinging the strands to the left, and then to the right, taking
alternately the third and fourth strands to the right of the ones last
used, until the braid is finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




ROPE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, sixty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take No. 2 in right hand, swing around the
table to the right and lay in place of No. 2 at B, and bring back No. 2
from B and lay in place of No. 2 at A; then take No. 1 at A in left
hand, and change places with No. 1 at B by swinging around to the left;
then go to C, take Nos. 3 and lift over table and lay inside of Nos. 3
at D, and bring back Nos. 3 from D and lay in place of Nos. 3 at C; then
go to E and change the Nos. at E and F the same as at A and B; then go
to G and change the same as at C and D, and so on, alternately changing,
first as at A and B, and then as at C and D, until the braid is
finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




DIAMOND SHAPED CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on the
table like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 2 lift across table and lay
in between Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then take
Nos. 1 at A and lift across table and lay between Nos. 1 at B, and bring
back Nos. 1 from B to A; then go to F, take No. 1 in right hand, swing
around to the right and lay in place of No. 4 at E; then take No. 1 at E
in left hand and swing around to the left and lay in place of No. 4 at
F; then go to C, take Nos. 2 lift across table, and lay them in between
Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 2 from D to C; then take Nos. 1 at C,
lift across the table and lay between Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1
from D to C; then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




FANCY SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take No. 1 in right hand, swing around to
the right and lay in place of No. 4 at B; then take No. 1 at B in left
hand, swing around table to the left and lay in place of No. 4 at A;
then go to C, take No. 2 in right hand, swing around the table to the
right and lay outside of No. 2 at D, and bring back No. 2 from D to C;
then take No. 1 at C in left hand, swing around the table to the left
and lay outside of No. 1 at D, and bring back No. 1 from D to C; then go
to E and change the Nos. at E and F the same as you did at A and B; then
change the Nos. at G and H the same as you did at C and D. Then you are
through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




FANCY SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take No. 1 in right hand, swing around to
the right and lay in place of No. 4 at B; then take No. 1 at B in left
hand, swing around table to the left and lay in place of No. 4 at A;
then go to C, take Nos. 1 and lift them across the table and lay in
between Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C; then go to E,
and change the Nos. at E and F the same as you did at A and B; then go
to G, and change the Nos. at G and H the same as you did at C and D.
Then you are through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




FANCY SQUARE CHAIN BRAID


TAKE twenty-four strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take No. 1 at the left side of A in the
right hand, and No. 1 at the left of B in the left hand, swing them
around the table to the right and lay the one from B at the right of A,
and the one from A at the right of B; then go to C, take No. 1 at the
left side of C in the right hand, and No. 1 at the left side of D in the
left hand, swing them around the table to the right, and lay the one
from C at the right of D, and the one from D at the right of C; then go
to B, take Nos. 3 and lift them across table and lay between Nos. 3 at
A, and bring back Nos. 3 from A to B; then change Nos. 2 and 1 the same
way; then go to C, take Nos. 3 and lift across the table and lay between
Nos. 3 at D, and bring back Nos. 3 from D to C; then change Nos. 2 and 1
the same way. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first, at A.

[Illustration]

For explanation see page 9.




FANCY SQUARE CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 2 and lift across the table and
lay between Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then change
Nos. 1 the same way; then go to C, take Nos. 2 and lift them across the
table and lay between Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 2 from D to A;
then change Nos. 1 the same way; then go to E, take Nos. 1 and 2 and
lift them across the table to F, and lay No. 1 from E at the right of
No. 1 at F, and No. 2 from E at the right of No. 2 at F, and bring back
the Nos. 1 and 2 from F to E; then go to G and change the same from G to
H as you did at E and F. Then you are through the braid, ready to
commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid, vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




FANCY TWIST BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 cross over and lay between Nos.
1 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B and lay between Nos. 2 at A; then
go to E, take Nos. 1 and 2 and cross over to F, and lay No. 1 down at
the right of No. 1 at F, and No. 2 at the right of No. 2 at F, and and
bring back Nos. 1 and 2 from F to E; then go to C, and change the Nos.
at C and D the same as you did at A and B; then go to G, and change the
Nos. at G and H the same as you did at E and F. Then you are through the
braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire,
and push the braid together; then boil in water about ten minutes, and
then take out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off the
wire and on the cord, and sew the ends so it will not slip, and put a
little shellac on the end to keep it fast. If you want it elastic, use
elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid vary the number of hairs in
a strand.




FLAT CHAIN BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, seventy hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and change places by crossing
one over the other; then go to B and cross the Nos. 1 the same way; then
go back to A, take Nos. 1 and cross over and lay between Nos. 1 at B,
and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A, and cross over
and lay between Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then
change Nos. 3 and 4 the same way; then go to C, take Nos. 1 and 2 and
cross over to D, and lay the No. 1 from C down at the left of No. 1 at
D, and the No. 2 from C down at the left of No. 2 at D, and bring back
the Nos. 1 and 2 from D to C; then take the Nos. 3 and 4, cross over to
D and lay the No. 3 from C down at the right of No. 3 at D, and the No.
4 from C down at the right of No. 4 at D, and bring back Nos. 3 and 4
from D to C. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence at A, as
at first.

[Illustration]

For explanation see page 9.




NECKLACE PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and 4 left across to B, lay in place
of Nos. 1 and 4 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 and 4 from B to A; then take
No. 2 at A in right hand and No. 3 in left hand, pass right hand round
table to the right to B, and lay the No. 2 from A in place of No. 3 at
B, and bring back No. 2 from B to A in right hand, and pass left hand
round table to the left, and lay No. 3 from A in place of No. 2 at B,
and bring back No. 3 from B to A, and lay No. 3 from B down at No. 2 at
A, and lay No. 2 from B down at No. 3 at A, then go to C and take Nos. 1
across over inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C;
then go to A and repeat this all three times; then the fourth time at C
you take Nos. 1 at C across over to D and lay outside of Nos. 2 at D,
bring back the Nos. 1 from D to C and lay them outside of Nos. 2 at C;
then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at first at A.
Braid it over a small cord so as to put it up together.




NECKLACE PATTERN.


TAKE sixteen strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 at A lift across inside of Nos. 1 at
B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then go to C, take Nos. 1 at C
lift across inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C;
then commence at A again and repeat it three times; then commence at A,
take Nos. 1 across to B and lay them outside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring
back Nos. 1 from B to A and lay outside of Nos. 2 at A; then go to C and
change from C to D the same as from A to B; then you are through the
braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a small wire, with a hole in one end like the eye of a
needle, so as to draw a small cord in the place of the wire. When you
have it braided, take off your weights, tie the ends fast on the wire
and push the braid together on the wire; then boil in water about ten
minutes; then take it out and put in an oven as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry; then take it out and slip it off
of the wire on to the cord, and sew the ends of the braid so it will not
slip on the cord, and put a little shellac on the end to keep it fast.
If you want it elastic, use elastic cord. To vary the size of the braid,
vary the number of hairs in a strand.




NECKLACE PATTERN.


TAKE sixteen strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 at A across over inside of Nos. 1 at
B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A across over
inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then take No.
1 at C in right hand and No. 1 at D in left hand and change them, lay
the No. 1 from C in place of No. 1 at D, and lay the No. 1 from D in
place of No. 1 at C; then change the Nos. 1 and 2 at A and B as at
first; then change the Nos. 2 at C and D, as you did the Nos. 1 at C and
D; then change the Nos. 1 and 2, as before, at A and B; then take Nos. 3
at C and D and change as you did the Nos. 2 at C and D; then change
again Nos. 1 and 2 at A and B as at first; then take the Nos. 4 at C and
D and change as you did the Nos. 3 at C and D; then you are through the
braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this without cord or wire.




NECKLACE PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 lift over to B in place of Nos. 1 at
B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A and change
over in place of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then
take No. 3 at A in right hand and No. 3 at B in left hand, and lay them
inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D and lay in place of
Nos. 3 at A and B; then take No. 4 at A in left hand and No. 4 at B in
right hand, and lay inside of Nos. 1 at C, and bring back Nos. 1 from C
to A and B, and lay in place of Nos. 4; then commence as at first and
repeat this three times, then take Nos. 1 at A, lift over to B in place
of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 at A
and change over in place of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to
A; then take Nos. 3 at A and B, lay inside of Nos. 1 at D; then take
Nos. 4 at A and B, lay inside of Nos. 1 at C; then take Nos. 2 at A and
lay outside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B and lay outside
of Nos. 1 at A; then take Nos. 1 at C, lift over inside of Nos. 1 at D
and bring back Nos. 1 from D and lay inside of Nos. 1 at C; then take
No. 1 at C, on the side next to B, in right hand, and lay it inside of
No. 1 at B; then take the No. 1 at D, next to B, in left hand, and lay
it inside of No. 1 at B; then take the No. 1 at C, next to A, in right
hand, and lay it inside of No. 1 at A; then take No. 1 at D, next to A,
and lay it inside of No. 1 at A; then take the Nos. 3 and 4 at A, lift
over to B, and lay outside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 3 and 4
from B and lay outside of Nos. 1 at A; then lift Nos. 2 at A over and
lay in place of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A, and lay
in place of Nos. 2 at A; then take No. 4 at A, in left hand, and No. 4
at B in right hand, and lay them inside of Nos. 1 at C, and bring the
Nos. 1 from C back in place of the Nos. 4 at A and B; then take No. 3 at
B in left hand, and No. 3 at A in right hand, and lay them inside of
Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D and lay in place of Nos. 3 at
A and B; then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at first.




NECKLACE PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty-two strands, fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Have the strands at A and B black hair, and those at C and
D light hair. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and cross over inside of Nos. 1
at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B and lay in place of Nos. 1 at A, then
take Nos. 2 at A, cross over inside of Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos.
2 from B and lay inside of Nos. 2 at A; then take No. 1 at C in right
hand, and No. 1 at D in left hand, cross over and lay the No. 1 from C
at D, and the No. 1 from D at C; then change the Nos. 1 and 2 at A and B
as at first; then take the Nos. 2 at C and D and change them as you did
the Nos. 1; then change again at A and B as at first; then take the Nos.
3 at C and D, and change as you did the Nos. 2; then change again at A
and B, and so on till you get to Nos. 7, and after changing that, change
again at A and B; then change Nos. 7 again, then those at A and B, then
Nos. 6, then at A and B, then Nos. 5, and so on back to No. 1, and
change No. 1 there as you did Nos. 7. Always braid those at A and B
between each of those at C and D.




NECKLACE PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE 24 strands, twenty-five hairs in a strand, and place on table like
this pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 lift across inside of Nos. 1 at
B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A, then go to C and take Nos. 1 at C
and cross inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C, then
go to A and change Nos. 1 from A to B, as at first, then take Nos. 1 at
E and F and swing round table with the same, and lay down in between
Nos. 1 at A and B, and lay the No. 1 at A and B in the place of No. 4 at
E and F, then change the Nos. 1 at C across inside of Nos. 1 at D, and
bring back Nos. 1 from D to C, then change Nos. 1 at A and B the same,
then the Nos. 1 at C and D again, then take Nos. 1 at H and G, swing
round table with the same, and lay in between Nos. 1 at C and D, and lay
the right hand ones at C and D up in place of No. 4 at H and G, then you
are through the braid ready to commence as at first. Braid it over a
cord so to push it together.




NECKLACE OR EDGING BRAID.


TAKE sixteen strands, fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 2 across inside of Nos. 2 at B, and
bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then take Nos. 1 at A, lift across inside
of Nos. 1 at B, and cross them, the one in right hand over the left, and
bring back Nos. 1 from B to A, and cross the right over the left; then
go to D, lift Nos. 1 across inside of Nos. 1 at C, cross the right over
the left, and bring back Nos. 1 from C to D, and cross the right over
the left; then repeat all from the beginning three times round the
table. Then go to D, lift Nos. 3, cross the right over the left, and lay
them outside of Nos. 1 at C; then go to A, lift Nos. 2 across inside of
Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then take Nos. 1 at A,
lift across inside of Nos. 1 at B, cross the right over the left, and
bring back Nos. 1 from B to A, and cross them; then go to D, lift Nos. 1
across inside of Nos. 1 at C, cross the right over the left, and bring
back Nos. 1 from C to D; then take Nos. 3 at C, and lay inside of Nos. 2
at D, and leave them there. Then you are through the braid, ready to
commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

See explanation on page 9.




HEAD DRESS OR NECKLACE BRAID.


TAKE twenty-four strands, eighty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, lift Nos. 1 and 2 across inside of Nos. 1
and 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 and 2 from B to A; then go to C, lift
Nos. 1 and 2 across inside of Nos. 1 and 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 1
and 2 from D to C; then go to A and change the Nos. 1 and 2 from A to B
the same as at first; then take Nos. 1 at E and F, swing round table to
the left, and lay them down between Nos. 1 and 2 at A and B; then lay
the Nos. 2 at A and B in place of Nos. 4 at E and F; then change the
Nos. 1 and 2 at C across inside of Nos. 1 and 2 at D, and bring back
Nos. 1 and 2 from D to C; then change the same at A and B; then change
again at C and D the same; then take Nos. 1 at H and G, swing round
table to the left, and lay them between Nos. 1 and 2 at C and D, and lay
the Nos. 2 at C and D in place of Nos. 4 at H and G. Then you are
through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid it over a strong cord, and when braided push it close together,
tie the ends, and boil in water five minutes; then heat it in an oven
until it is quite dry, and it is ready for use.




RING PATTERN.


TAKE thirteen strands, fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern. Commence at A, lift No. 5 over between Nos. 2 and 3 at A;
then take No. 1 at A, and lift over between Nos. 2 and 3 at B; then take
No. 1 at B, and lift over between Nos. 2 and 3 at C; then lift No. 1 at
C over between Nos. 2 and 3 at C; then lift No. 4 at C over between Nos.
2 and 3 at B; then lift No. 4 at B over between Nos. 2 and 3 at A. Then
you are through the braid, ready to commence as at first, and repeating
until it is the required length. Then tie it out straight on a flat
stick, boil it in water five minutes, then heat it in an oven as hot as
it will bear without burning, until it is quite dry, and then it is
ready for use.

[Illustration]

The above directions, after braiding, will suffice for finishing all
Ring Braids, unless other directions are given.




RING BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty-four strands, twenty hairs in the strands at C and D, and
ten hairs in the strands at A and B, and place on table like pattern.
Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and lift across table and lay inside of Nos.
1 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B and lay outside of Nos. 2 at A;
then go to C, take Nos. 1, cross over and lay in between Nos. 1 at D,
and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C; then take Nos. 3 at C, cross inside
of Nos. 3 at D, and bring back Nos. 3 from D to C; then take Nos. 4 at
C, cross over inside of Nos. 4 at D, and bring back Nos. 4 from D to C;
then commence at A, and change them at A and B as at first; then go to C
and commence with the Nos. 2. You must leave the Nos. 1 every other time
and the Nos. 2 every other time, and braid it as at first.




RIB RING BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE nineteen strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take No. 1 and lift over Nos. 2 and 3, under 4
and 5, over 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, and lay over to B; then take No. 1 at B,
lift over Nos. 2 and 3, under 4 and 5, over 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, and lay
over to A; then you are through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at
first,--first round to the left, and then to the right, and so on,
repeating the changes as above, until the braid is finished. Then tie it
out straight on a flat stick, boil in water five minutes, then heat it
in an oven as hot as it will bear without burning until it is quite dry,
and then it is ready for use.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take the Nos. 1 and lift across the table and
lay in place of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then
take the Nos. 2, 3 and 4, and change the same; then go to C, take the
Nos. 1 and lift across the table and lay in place of Nos. 1 at D, and
bring back Nos. 1 from D to C; then commence again at A, take Nos. 1 and
lift over the table and lay in the place of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back
the Nos. 1 from B to A; then change the Nos. 2 and 3 the same as the
Nos. 1; then go to C and change the Nos. 1 over in the place of Nos. 1
at D, and bring back the Nos. 1 from D to C; then go to A, and take the
Nos. 1, 2 and 3, and change the same as before; then go to C and change
the same as before. Then you are through the braid ready to commence at
A, as at first, and repeat until the braid is finished.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and lift over across the table, and
lay in place of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B and lay in
place of Nos. 1 at A; then take Nos. 2, 3 and 4, and change their places
the same as Nos. 1; then go to C, take Nos. 1 and lift over across the
table and lay in place of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to
C; then go to A, take Nos. 1 and lift them over the table and lay in
place of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos.
3 and 4 and change the same; then go to C, take Nos. 1 and lift them
over the table and lay in place of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1
from D to C. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence at A, as
at first, and repeat the changes until the braid is finished.




RING PATTERN.


TAKE twenty strands, fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1, lift across to B, and lay inside of
Nos. 1, and bring back Nos. 2 from B and lay in between Nos. 2 at A;
then go to C, take Nos. 1 and lift over inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring
back Nos. 1 from D to C; then take Nos. 2 at C, and cross over inside of
Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 2 from D to C; then take Nos. 3 at C,
cross over inside of Nos. 3 at D, and bring back Nos. 3 from D to C;
then commence again at A, as at first, and repeat until it is braided
the desired length.

[Illustration]

When the braid is finished, tie it out straight on a flat stick, boil in
water five minutes, and heat in an oven until perfectly dry, and then it
is ready for use.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and lay on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and lift over table and lay in place
of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2 and
change the same; then the Nos. 3, and change the same; then go to C,
take the Nos. 2 and lay outside of the Nos. 1; then go to D, and take
the Nos. 2 and lay outside of the Nos. 1; then go to C, and take Nos. 2
and lift over table and lay in place of Nos. 2 at D, and bring back the
Nos. 2 from D to C; then go to A, take Nos. 1 and lift across the table
and lay in place of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then
take Nos. 3 at A, and lift across table in place of Nos. 3 at B, and
bring back Nos. 3 from B to A; then go to C, take Nos. 2 and lay outside
of Nos. 1; then go to D, take Nos. 2 and lay outside of Nos. 1; then go
to C, take Nos. 2 and lift over table in place of Nos. 2 at D, and bring
back Nos. 2 from D to C. Then you are ready to commence at A, as at
first, and repeat until finished.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE fifteen strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, by taking No. 1 and lifting it over Nos. 2, 3
and 4, under Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8, and pass it over to B; then take No. 1
at B, lift over Nos. 2, 3 and 4, under 5, 6, 7 and 8, and pass it over
to A; then you are through, ready to commence at A, as at first, and
repeat until the braid is finished,--first round to the left, and then
round to the right.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE nineteen strands, ten hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take No. 1 and lift over Nos. 2, 3 and 4, under
5 and 6, over 7 and 8, under 9 and 10, and pass it over to B; then take
No. 1 at B, and lift over Nos. 2, 3 and 4, under 5 and 6, over 7 and 8,
under 9 and 10, and lay it over to A; then go to A and commence at No.
1, as at first, and repeat over and over, first to the left and then to
the right, and so on, until the braid is finished. Then tie it out
straight on a flat stick, boil in water five minutes, and heat it in an
oven as hot as it will bear without burning, until it is quite dry, and
then it is ready for use.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty-four strands, and place on table like pattern. Commence at
A, take Nos. 1 and lift across inside of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back
Nos. 2 inside of Nos. 2 at A; then go to C, and take Nos. 1 and cross
over inside of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C; then take
Nos. 2 at C, and cross over inside of Nos. 2 at D, and bring back Nos. 2
from D to C; then take Nos. 3 at C, and cross over inside of Nos. 3 at
D, and bring back Nos. 3 from D to C; then take Nos. 4 at C, and cross
over inside of Nos. 4 at D, and bring back Nos. 4 from D to C; if you
wish to reverse every other time, you may leave the Nos. 1 and not braid
them; then you are ready to commence at A as at first.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty-four strands, sixteen hairs in a strand, and place on the
table like pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and cross over to B, lay
in between Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B and lay in place of
Nos. 1 at A; then take Nos. 2 at A, and change them the same way; then
Nos. 3 the same; then Nos. 4 the same. Then take Nos. 1 at C and D, and
lift over Nos. 2; then lift Nos. 1 at C over in place of Nos. 1 at D,
and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C; then go to A, and take Nos. 2, cross
over between Nos. 2 at B, and bring back Nos. 2 from B to A; then take
Nos. 3 and change the same way; then take Nos. 4 and change the same.
Then go to C and D, and lift Nos. 1 over Nos. 2, and then lift Nos. 1 at
C over and lay in place of Nos. 1 at D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D and
lay in place of Nos. 1 at C; then you are ready to commence as at first,
at A, and repeat until the braid is finished. You will place double
weight on the strands at C and D.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty-eight strands, of twelve hairs, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take Nos. 1 and cross over the table and lay in
place of Nos. 1 at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then change the
Nos. 2 the same. Then take Nos. 4 at A, and lift over the table in place
of Nos. 4 at B, and bring back Nos. 4 from B to A; then take Nos. 5 and
change the same way. Then go to C and D, and lift the Nos. 1 over the
Nos. 2; then take Nos. 1 at C, and lift them over the table inside of
Nos. 1 at D, and bring back the Nos. 1 from D and lay in place of Nos. 1
at C; then go to A, and take Nos. 1 and cross over in place of Nos. 1 at
B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then take Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5, and
change all the same. Then go to C and D, and lift Nos. 1 over Nos. 2;
then lift Nos. 1 at C over the table, and lay them inside of Nos. 1 at
D, and bring back Nos. 1 from D to C. Then you are through the braid,
ready to commence at A, as at first, and repeat until the braid is
finished. Place extra weight on the strands at C and D.




RING OR BRACELET PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty-four strands, twenty hairs in a strand, and place on table
like pattern, thirteen on the right side and eleven on the left. Take
No. 1 at right hand, lift over Nos. 2 3 and 4, and under Nos. 5 and 6,
and over No. 7; then take No. 1 again, in right hand, and lift over Nos.
2 3 and 4, and under Nos. 5 and 6; then take the same two that you have
braided along, and lift over two strands, and under two, till you get to
the center; then pass the same two strands across to the left side, and
lay them down next to No. 11; then commence on the left side with No. 1,
and braid the left side as you did the right; then the braid is through,
ready to commence as at first, with No. 1 at right hand, and so on.
Repeat till finished.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE thirteen strands, twelve hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence by lifting No. 7 over Nos. 6 and 5, and under Nos. 4
and 3, and over Nos. 2 and 1, and lay it next to No. 1 on the left side,
making seven on the left side; then commence on the left side, take the
outside one and braid it into the middle, over two and under two, till
you get to the center, and lay it across on the opposite side; then you
are through with the braid, and ready to commence as at first, with the
No. 7 at right hand. You can have any odd number of strands you please.




RING PATTERN.


[Illustration]

TAKE twenty strands, ten hairs in a strand, and lay on table like
pattern. Commence at A, take No. 2 in right hand and swing it round the
table to the right, and lay it across No. 2 at B, and bring back No. 2
from B to A; then take No. 1 at A in left hand, and swing it round the
table to the left, and lay it across No. 1 at B, and bring back No. 1
from B to A. Then commence at C and D; take No. 1 at C in left hand, and
No. 1 at D in right hand, and change places with them by passing the
left hand over the right; then take Nos. 2 at C and D, and change the
same way; then take Nos. 3 and change the same way; then take Nos. 4 and
change the same way. Then go to B, and change the Nos. 1 at E and F as
you did at C and D, by commencing at Nos. 1 first, then the Nos. 2, 3
and 4, in succession. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence
as at first, at A. Braid it over a small wire.




BRACELET TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, and Nos. 1 and 3 over Nos. 2 and 4, and so on round table to the
left, till you get to A; then go to C, braid to the left, lift Nos. 1
and 2 over Nos. 3 and 4, and so on round to A; then commence at A and
braid round to the right; lift No. 2 over No. 3, and Nos. 3 and 4 over
Nos. 2 and 1, and so on round table to A; then go to C, braid round to
the right, and lift Nos. 2 and 4 over Nos. 3 and 1, and so on round to
A. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




BRACELET BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE sixteen strands, thirty hairs in a strand, and place on the table
like pattern. Commence at A, take the Nos. 1 and 2 and lay them over
Nos. 3 right and left; then lay the Nos. 1 at A over Nos. 1 at C and D,
and bring back the Nos. 1 from C and D and lay outside of Nos. 3 at A;
then lay the Nos. 2 at A over Nos. 1; then go to B and repeat the same
as at A, only change the Nos. 1 at B with the Nos. 2 at C, instead of
the Nos. 1 at C; then lift the Nos. 1 at A over and lay between Nos. 1
at B, and bring back Nos. 1 from B to A; then go to C and lift Nos. 1
and 2 over between Nos. 1 and 2 at D, and bring back the Nos. 1 and 2
from D to C. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence at A, as
at first. Braid this over a small wire, and place double weight on the
strands at C and D, and Nos. 1 at A and B.




BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--forty being the
usual number for this braid--twelve hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and
lift No. 3 over No. 2; then No. 1 over No. 2; then No. 4 over Nos. 3 and
2; then go to B and change the same way, and so on round the table to A.
Then go to C, commence with the outside row of figures, and braid round
to the left; lift No. 2 over No. 3; then No. 3 over No. 4; then No. 2
over No. 1; then No. 2 over No. 3, and so on round the table to A; then
you will be through the braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




ELASTIC BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--forty being the
usual number for this braid--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift
No. 2 in right hand, and put your left hand under the right hand, and
take Nos. 3 and 4 and bring them back, and cross them over No. 1, and
lay them all down; then go to B, and change the same way, and so on
round the table to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of
figures, and braid round to the left; lift No. 3 in left hand, and put
your right hand under the left hand and take Nos. 1 and 2, bring them
back, cross them over No. 4, and lay them all down, and so on round the
table to A; then you will be through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




ELASTIC BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four--sixty being the
usual number for this braid--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and
braid round table to the right; lift No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 4 over
Nos. 3 and 2; then repeat with the same strands, the No. 1 over No. 2,
and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2. Then go to B and braid the same, and so on
round table to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of
figures, and braid round table to the left; lift No. 1 over No. 2, and
No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2; then repeat with the same strands, the same as
you did at A and B, and so on round table to A. Then you are through the
braid, ready to commence as at first. After it is braided turn the braid
inside out.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, and push
it tight together, tying it so it will fit the mold exactly, and then
boil in water five minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven as hot
as it will bear without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready
for use.




DOUBLE ELASTIC BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four--sixty being the
usual number for this braid--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures; and
braid round table to the right; cross No. 4 over No. 3, and No. 1 over
Nos. 2 and 3; then repeat with the same strands. Then go to B, and braid
the same, and so on round table to the right, until you get to A. Then
go to C, and braid back round table to the left, by crossing No. 2 over
No. 1, and No. 3 over No. 4, and No. 2 over No. 3; then repeat with the
same strands, and so on round table till you get to A. Then you are
through the braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, and push
it tight together, tying it so it will fit the mold exactly, and then
boil in water five minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven as hot
as it will bear without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready
for use.




FANCY TIGHT BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, and Nos. 1 and 3 over Nos. 2 and 4; then go to B, and braid the
same to the left until you get to A; then commence at C, with the
outside row of figures, and braid round table to the left again; lift
Nos. 1 and 2 over Nos. 3 and 4, and so on round table till you get to A.
Then commence with the inside row of figures at A, and lift No. 2 over
No. 3, and Nos. 2 and 4 over Nos. 3 and 1; then go to B, and braid the
same to the right, and so on round table to A; then commence at C with
the outside row of figures, and braid round to the right, lift Nos. 3
and 4 over Nos. 2 and 1, and so on round table to A; then you are
through the braid, ready to commence as at first. Be sure and braid the
first two times round table to the left, and the last two to the right.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use. To have it
elastic use elastic cord.




REVERSE TIGHT BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, and No. 1 over No. 2, then No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2; then go to B
and change the same to the left, and so on round table to A; then go to
C, braid to the left with the outside row of figures, lift Nos. 3 and 4
over Nos. 1 and 2, and so on round to A. Then commence again at A and
braid round to the right; lift No. 2 over No. 3, then No. 2 over No. 1,
and Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4, and so on round table to A; then commence
at C and braid to the right, lift Nos. 1 and 2 over Nos. 3 and 4, and so
on round to A. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




BANDED BRACELET BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, and No. 1 over No. 2, then No. 3 over No. 4, and No. 3 over No.
2; braid round table to the left till you get to A, then repeat the same
at C with the outside row of figures. After braiding the second time
round, commence again at A, with the inside row of figures, and braid
round to the right; lift Nos. 3 and 4 over Nos. 1 and 2, and so on round
to A; then repeat, at C, with the outside row of figures. Then you are
through the braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




PLAIN OPEN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 1 over
No. 2, No. 4 over No. 3, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 4 over No. 3; then
No. 3 over No. 2, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 4 over Nos. 2 and 3. Braid
round table to the left till you get to A, then repeat the same at C,
only braid the outside row of figures. Then you are through the braid,
ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN FINE BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
The usual number for this braid--four hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift
No. 2 over No. 3; then No. 2 over No. 1; then No. 2 over No. 3; then
Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4; then No. 2 over No. 1. Then go to B and change
the same way, and so on round the table to A. Then go to C, and commence
with the outside row of figures, and change the same as you did at A,
and so on round the table, when you will be through the braid, ready to
commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN FINE BRAID.


TAKE any number of Strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number for this braid--four hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift
No. 1 over Nos. 2, 3 and 4; then No. 3 over Nos. 2 and 1; then No. 2
over Nos. 3 and 4; then No. 2 over No. 1. Then go to B and change the
same, and so on round the table to A. Then go to C, and commence with
the outside row of figures, and change the same as you did at A, and so
on round the table, when you will be through the braid, ready to
commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN LACE BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 2, and so on
round the table to the left to A; then commence at C, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 2, No. 1 over
No. 2 and No. 3 over No. 4. Then you are through the braid, ready to
commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number for this braid--four hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift
No. 3 over No. 2; then No. 3 over No 4; then No. 1 over No. 2; then No.
3 over No. 2; then No. 1 over No. 2; then No. 3 over No. 4. Then go to B
and change the same way, and so on round the table to A. Then go to C,
and commence with the outside row of figures, and change the same as you
did at A, and so on round the table, when you will be through the braid,
ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




BASKET TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE thirty-two strands, or any number that can be divided by four,
fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like pattern. Commence at
A, with the inside row of figures, and braid round the table to the
left; lift No. 3 over No. 2, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 4;
then commence at C, with the outside row of figures, and braid round the
table to the left; lift Nos. 1 and 2 over Nos. 3 and 4; then commence at
A, as before, and braid round the table to the right; put No. 3 under
No. 2, and lift No. 2 over No. 1, and No. 3 over No. 4; then commence at
C, as before, and braid round the table to the right, and put Nos. 1 and
2 under Nos. 3 and 4. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence
at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--forty being the
usual number--twelve hairs in a strand, and place on table like pattern.
Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and lift Nos. 1 and 2
over Nos. 3 and 4; then go to B and change the same way, and so on round
table to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of figures, and
braid round to the left; lift Nos. 3 and 4 over Nos. 1 and 2, and so on
round the table to A. Then you will be through the braid, ready to
commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




ACORN TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 2 over
No. 3, No. 4 over No. 3, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 2, and so
on round table to the right till you get to A; then commence at C, braid
round to the right, lift Nos. 3 and 4 over Nos. 1 and 2, and so on round
table to A. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence at A, as
at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




HALF TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, and Nos. 1 and 3 over Nos. 2 and 4, and so on round table to A;
then commence at C with the outside row of figures, lift No. 2 over No.
3, No. 2 over No. 1, No. 2 over No. 3, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4, and No.
2 over No. 1, and so on round table to A. Then you are through the
braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




FANCY TIGHT BRAID.


IN this pattern you braid with eight strands, or with two groups of
fours. Commence at B, lift No. 4 in left hand and lay down between Nos.
3 and 4 at C, and take No. 4 at C in right hand; then lift No. 3 at B
over between Nos. 2 and 3 at C, and take No. 3 at C in right hand; then
lift No. 2 at B over between Nos. 1 and 2 at C, and take No. 2 at C in
right hand; then lift No. 1 at B over next to No. 1 at C, and take No. 1
at C in right hand, and then lift those in right hand over to B, and lay
them all down. Braid round to the right till you get to A, then take the
next eight strands, and braid round table to the left; lift No. 1 at C
over between Nos. 1 and 2 at B, and take No. 1 at B in left hand; then
lift No. 2 at C over between Nos. 2 and 3 at B, and take No. 2 at B in
left hand; then lift No. 3 at C over between Nos. 3 and 4 at B, and take
No. 3 at B in left hand; then lift No. 4 at C over next to No. 4 at B,
and take No. 4 at B in left hand, and then lift those in left hand over
to C and lay them all down, and so on round table, taking the next eight
strands, till you get to A. Then you are through the braid, ready to
commence as at first.

[Illustration]

See explanation on page 100.




PLAIN TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number for this braid--four hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift
No. 3 over No. 2; then No. 3 over No. 4; then No. 1 over No. 2; then No.
3 over No. 2. Then go to B and change the same way, and so round the
table to A. Then go to C, and commence with the outside row of figures,
and change the same as you did at A, and so on round the table, when you
will be through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




ACORN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 2, and so
on round table to A; then go to C, take the outside row of figures, and
make the same changes round to A, and repeat alternately at A and C,
until the braid is long enough to cover the bottom of the acorn, and
then commence at A with the inside row of figures; lift No. 3 over No.
2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 2, No. 1 over No.
2, and No. 3 over No. 4, and so on round to A; then go to C, take the
outside row of figures, and make the same changes round to A; then
repeat until the braid is long enough to make the top or bur of the
acorn. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




HALF OPEN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 1 over
between Nos. 2 and 3 at B; then lift No. 1 at B over between Nos. 2 and
3 of the next four strands, and so on round table to the left to A; then
go to C, take the outside row of figures, lift No. 2 over No. 3, No. 2
over No. 1, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4; then No. 3 over No. 4, and No. 2
over No. 1, and so on round the table to the right, till the braid is
finished.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OVERSHOT BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, braid to the
right, lift No. 2 over Nos. 3 and 4, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 3 over
No. 2, and so on round to A; then go to C and repeat the same changes,
with the outside row of figures, round to A; then commence at A with the
inside row of figures, and braid to the left; lift No. 3 over Nos. 1 and
2, No. 4 over No. 3, and No. 2 over No. 3, and so on round to A; then go
to C, and repeat the same changes, with the outside row of figures,
round to A. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




DIAMOND TIGHT BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have Nos. 1
and 2 of white hair, and Nos. 3 and 4 of black hair; lift Nos. 1 and 2
over Nos. 3 and 4, and so on round table to the left, to A; then go to
C, and braid round table to the right; lift Nos. 3 and 4 over Nos. 1 and
2, and so on round table to A. Then you are through the braid, ready to
commence as at first.

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




SPIRAL STRIPED BRAID.


[Illustration]

TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
alternately four strands of white hair and four of black; braid round
table to the left, lift Nos. 1 and 2 over Nos. 3 and 4, and so on round
table to A; then go to C, braid round table to the right, lift Nos. 3
and 4 over Nos. 1 and 2, and so on round to A. Then you are through the
braid, ready to commence as at first.

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




EMPRESS TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, No. 1 over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, and No. 3 over No. 2; braid
round table to the left till you get to A, then go to C, take the
outside row of figures, and braid round to the right; lift Nos. 3 and 4
over Nos. 1 and 2, and so on round to A, and repeat with the inside row
of figures, and then repeat again with the outside row; then you are
through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first. Commence at C
every other time, for you only braid the first change of figures once,
and the last change three times.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN CHECK BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Have one-half the strands white and one-half black, and place
on table alternately, four white and four black. Commence at A, with the
inside row of figures, lift No. 2 over No. 3, No. 2 over No. 1, No. 2
over No. 3, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4, and No. 2 over No. 1. Then go to B
and change the same way, and so on round table to A. Then go to C,
commence with the outside row of figures, and change the same as you did
at A, and so on round the table; then you will be through the braid,
ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




SCOTCH PLAID BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Have one-third the strands white hair, one-third black, and
one-third red, and place on table alternately, four white, four black,
and four red. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 2
over No. 3, No. 2 over No. 1, No. 2 over No. 3, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4,
and No. 2 over No. 1. Then go to B and change the same way, and so on
round table to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of
figures, and change the same as you did at A, and so on round the table;
then you will be through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




HALF OPEN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift No. 3 over
No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 2; braid
half way round the table, and then braid the last half by lifting No. 3
over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 2, No. 1
over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 4, and so on round to A; then go to C and
repeat the same. Then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN STRIPED BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-half the strands white hair, and one-half black, and place
alternately one strand of white, and one strand of black; lift No. 2
over No. 3, No. 2 over No. 1, No. 2 over No. 3, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4,
and No. 2 over No. 1. Then go to B and change the same way, and so on
round table to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of
figures, and change the same as at A, and so on round table; then you
will be through the braid, ready to commence as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




CHINCHILLA OPEN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-half of the strands white hair, and one-half black, and place
alternately two strands of white and two of black; lift No. 2 over No.
3, No. 2 over No. 1, No. 2 over No. 3, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4, and No.
2 over No. 1; then go to B and change the same way, and so on round
table to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of figures, and
change the same as you did at A, and so on round table. Then you will be
through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




FANCY LACE BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-half the strands white hair, and one-half black, and place
alternately two strands of white, and two strands of black; lift No. 3
over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, No. 3 over No. 2, No. 1
over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 4. Then go to B and change the same way,
and so on round to A. Then go to C, commence with the outside row of
figures, and change the same as you did at A, and so on round table;
then you will be through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




STRIPED ELASTIC BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-half the strands white hair, and one-half black, and place
alternately Nos. 1 and 2 of white, and Nos. 3 and 4 of black; lift No. 1
over No. 2, and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2; then repeat with the same
strands, the No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2. Then go to B
and braid the same, and so on round table to A. Then go to C, commence
with the outside row of figures, and braid round to the left; lift No. 1
over No. 2, and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2; then repeat with the same
strands, the same as at A and B, and so on round to A. Then you are
through the braid, ready to commence as at first. After it is braided,
turn the braid inside out.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN STRIPED BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--sixty being the
usual number--fifteen hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-half of the strands white hair, and one-half black, and place
alternately one strand of white and one of black; lift No. 1 over No. 2,
and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2; then repeat with the same strands, the No.
1 over No. 2, and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2. Then go to B and braid the
same, and so on round table to A. Then go to C, commence with the
outside row of figures, and braid round to the left; lift No. 1 over No.
2, and No. 4 over Nos. 3 and 2; then repeat with the same strands, the
same as at A and B, and so on round to A. Then you are through the
braid, ready to commence as at first. After it is braided, turn the
braid inside out.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




WIDE STRIPED BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number,--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-fourth of the strands white hair, and three-fourths black, and place
all the white strands on one side of the table, and all of the black on
the other side; lift No. 2 over No. 3, No. 2 over No. 1, No. 2 over No.
3, Nos. 2 and 3 over No. 4, and No. 2 over No. 1. Then go to B and
change the same way, and so on round table to A. Then go to C, commence
with the outside row of figures, and change the same as at A, and so on
round table; then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




NEAPOLITAN TIGHT BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number--four hairs in a strand, and place on table like
pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, and have
one-fourth of the strands white hair, and three-fourths black,--the Nos.
1 white, and the Nos. 2, 3 and 4 black; lift No. 3 over No. 2, No. 3
over No. 4, No. 1 over No. 2, and No. 3 over No. 2. Then go to B and
change the same way, and so on round table to A. Then go to C, commence
with the outside row of figures, and change the same as at A, and so on
round table; then you are through the braid, ready to commence as at
first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying it
so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five minutes,
and take it out and put it in an oven as hot as it will bear without
burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




OPEN BRAID.


TAKE any number of strands that can be divided by four,--eighty being
the usual number for this braid--four hairs in a strand, and place on
table like pattern. Commence at A, with the inside row of figures, lift
No. 3 over No. 2; then No. 3 over No. 4; then No. 1 over No. 2; then No.
3 over No. 2. Then go to B and change the same way, and so round the
table to A. Then go to C, and commence with the outside row of figures,
and change the same as you did at A, and so on round the table, when you
will be through the braid, ready to commence at A, as at first.

[Illustration]

Braid this over a round stick, the size you want the braid for use,
varying the number of strands according to the size of the stick; then
slip the braid from the stick on to the mold you wish to use, tying the
braid so it will fit the mold exactly, and then boil in water five
minutes, and take it out and put it in an oven, as hot as it will bear
without burning, until it is quite dry. Then it is ready for use.




DIRECTIONS FOR NEW BEGINNERS.


The hair to be used in braiding should be combed perfectly straight, and
tied with a string at the roots, to prevent wasting. Then count the
number of hairs for a strand, and pull it out from the tips, dip it in
water and draw it between the thumb and finger to make it lie smoothly;
then tie a solid, single knot at one end, the same as you would with a
sewing thread.


THE BOBBIN.

To prepare the bobbin for the hair, wind it with white thread, as shown
in the plate, and fasten it with a slip-knot over the knob, leaving an
end of some three inches, with a solid knot tied at the end of it. To
adjust the hair to the bobbins, take the prepared strands of hair and
tie the knotted ends in a square knot to the ends of the strings on the
bobbins. When each strand is thus prepared and tied to the bobbin
strings, place them even, and tie the ends with a string to prevent
their slipping.

See cut of Bobbins on another page.


HOW TO PLACE THEM ON THE TABLE-COVER FOR BRAIDING.

Place the strands across the table-cover, over the numbers, as shown in
the diagram, and fasten a weight to the end of them, under the table,
through the center of cover; then tie the mold or form to be braided,
around in the center, and you are ready for braiding.

For further reference, see plate of table, with explanations.




[Illustration: BRAIDING TABLE.

No. 1.]


The Table Cover, as shown in diagram No. 1, represents the under side of
the cover, showing the rim that fits over the cap, allowing the cover to
revolve, for the convenience of the braider. The cavity through the
cover and cap allows the braid, with the weight attached, to pass
through as fast as braided.

For reference see Braiding Table complete, with bobbins and weights
attached, on page 124.




[Illustration: BRAIDING TABLE

No. 2.]


The above cut represents Braiding Table No. 2, complete, showing the
strands over the cover, with Bobbins attached; also, the weight attached
to the braid, showing the manner of its passing through the table.

[Illustration: BRAIDING TABLE AND POSITION IN BRAIDING.]




[Illustration: WOOD BRAIDING BOBBINS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The above cut shows the Wood Bobbins, for fine open work or tight
braids. No. 1 is used for braiding any pattern of from one to four hairs
in a strand. No. 2 is used for braiding any pattern of from five to
twenty hairs in a strand. To prepare the Bobbins for use, see
explanations on page 121.




[Illustration: LEAD BOBBINS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The above cut shows the size and shape of the Lead Bobbins. The No. 1
size is used for braiding Rings and Chains, that have but few hairs in a
strand--from twenty to forty. No. 2 is used for braiding Chains that
have from forty to one hundred hairs in a strand. Either size will
answer for any pattern of Chain or Ring, but to vary the size of the
Bobbin according to the number of hairs in a strand, gives it a nicer
finish. To prepare the Bobbin, wind it with thread, as shown in the cut,
leaving the thread some three inches long, with a solid knot tied at the
end.




[Illustration: LEAD WEIGHT.]


The above cut shows the weight used for drawing the work through the
center of the table as fast as braided, and to balance the bobbins.
Attention should be given to have the weight balance the bobbins
properly, as too great a weight will make the braid loose, or too light
a weight will leave it rough. Use any number of weights required to
balance the bobbins.




[Illustration: FORMS FOR BRAIDING OVER.

No. 1. No. 2. No. 3. No. 4.]


The above cuts are made of wire and wood, for braiding over. The Nos. 1
and 2 are for braiding chains over--the No. 1 for small chains, and the
No. 2 for large sizes. No. 3 is used for braiding tight or open work
braids, of from thirty to forty strands. No. 4 is used for the same
braids, with from forty to sixty strands in a braid. The mold may be
made any length, to accommodate the work.




[Illustration: FORMS FOR BRAIDING OVER.

No. 5. No. 6. No. 7.]


The above cuts show the size of forms used for tight or open work
braids. The No. 5 is used for braids of from sixty to eighty strands,
No. 6 of from eighty to one hundred, and No. 7 from one hundred to one
hundred and twenty, according to the fineness of the braid.




[Illustration: EXPLANATIONS ON BRACELETS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The above cuts represent the completed Bracelet Braid. The No. 1 is
formed from fourteen small braids, braided according to diagram and
explanation on page 104,--using, however, but thirty-two strands,
instead of eighty.

After you have the small braids all completed and prepared, as required
in the explanation, sew them together at one end, so they all lie smooth
and flat, then divide them off in twos, using each two as one strand,
and plait them together; commence at the right side, take one strand at
a time, and lift over one and under two till you get to the center, then
commence on the left side and braid the same way, and so on till
finished. Then sew the ends well, trim them, and put on a little shellac
to fasten them in the clasps.

No. 2 is from the same pattern, and is prepared and finished up in the
same manner. For this Bracelet you use fifteen small braids, divide them
into threes for each strand, and lift over one and under one, from each
side to the center.




[Illustration: EXPLANATIONS ON BRACELETS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The No. 1 cut of the above Bracelet Braids, is formed from patterns on
pages 87 and 97, and instead of using forty and sixty strands, use but
thirty-two for each. Braid six small braids from pattern on page 87, and
three from pattern on page 97. Sew them tight together at one end,
divide them off in threes, with the open work braid between the two
tight ones, use each three as one strand, and plait them together in a
common three strand braid.

No. 2 is braided according to pattern on page 89. Have three of the
braids, sew them fast at one end, and then twist them carefully and
evenly together; then sew and fasten with shellac, and it is ready for
being gold mounted.




[Illustration: EXPLANATIONS ON BRACELETS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The No. 1 cut of the above Bracelet Braids, is formed from patterns on
pages 26 and 86. Have two small braids from each of the patterns, lay
them side by side, as in cut, and sew them firmly together, either with
some of the hair, or with very fine silk of the same color. Then sew and
trim the ends, and fasten with shellac.

No. 2 is braided from patterns on pages 18 and 86. Have four small
braids like pattern on page 18, and two like pattern on page 86. Place
them side by side, as in cut, and prepare and finish up the same as in
the above.




[Illustration: EXPLANATIONS ON BRACELETS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The patterns used for the No. 1, represented above, are found on pages
63 and 95. Have one braid from pattern on page 63, and two from that on
page 95. Place them side by side, as in cut, sew the ends firmly
together, either with some of the hair, or with very fine silk of the
same color. Then sew and trim the ends, and fasten with shellac.

For the No. 2, use two small braids from pattern on page 18, one from
pattern on page 63, and two from pattern on page 95. Place them as in
cut, sew them together, and prepare the same as No. 1.




[Illustration: EXPLANATIONS ON BRACELETS.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The No. 1 of the above Bracelet Braids, is made up of two small braids
from pattern on page 97, and three from pattern on page 101, using,
however, but thirty-two strands, instead of sixty. Place them side by
side, as in cut, and sew them together with some of the hair, or with
fine silk of the same color. Sew, trim and shellac the ends, and they
are ready for the gold mounting.

No. 2 is formed of four small braids, from pattern on page 97, and is
prepared, sewed and finished up the same as No. 1.




LITHOGRAPHED DESIGNS.


The following Lithographic designs of Hair Jewelry, Flowers and
Pictures, are given for the purpose of showing a few of the many
beautiful forms into which the human hair may be transposed. Each and
every one of the devices on the following pages, with the exception of
the flowers and pictures, can be braided from the diagrams and
explanations given in the first one hundred and twenty pages of this
book. Select any article you may wish to make, and by referring to the
patterns, you can easily find the style and directions whereby to braid
it. We might have given twice the number of patterns, or even more, but
any person can, after a little experience, readily invent new and
different styles of braids, and by so doing, each can satisfy their own
peculiar taste.

The making of Hair Flowers is very simple, and yet, of course, every one
has first to learn it. Supply yourself with as many different colors of
hair as you can, and by applying Gum Tragacanth, it renders it capable
of being cut in any shape you may wish--such as leaves, twigs, buds,
&c., and by judiciously arranging the colors, the effect will be very
pleasing. Pictures are made in the same manner, and any one possessing
the least artistic skill, can make any flower or picture they may
desire, and many pleasing adornments and lasting mementos may thereby be
had.

All articles intended to be worn as jewelry, should, of course, be
mounted with gold, and as this kind of work is not done in all jewelry
establishments, I wish to say that my facilities for this branch of
business is complete, and the work done is in the best possible manner.
I can guarantee satisfaction in all cases, let the style desired be what
it may. In sending braids to be mounted, draw on paper, as near as can
be, the style or design you want.




[Illustration: M. CAMPBELL'S,

DESIGNS

OF

HAIR

JEWELRY.]

[Transcriber's Note: For this text edition, fifty instances of
the [Illustration] tag were removed at this point. This was done in an
effort to make reading the text less tedious. The actual illustrations
can, of course, be seen in the HTML edition of this text.]






WEAVING HAIR FOR SWITCHES.


[Illustration]

The above cut represents the apparatus used for weaving hair into
Switches, Curls, Wigs, &c. It is a very simple arrangement, and can be
easily constructed. Provide two straight sticks, about twelve inches
long, and in one of them bore three small holes, two inches apart, in
which to place as many thumb-screws, to be used for tightening or
loosening the cords; in the other, have a single wooden pin or nail, to
fasten the cords to. Place the sticks in a firm, upright position, about
three feet apart, either by boring holes through a table, or by using
mortised blocks, such as is plainly shown in cut, at the right end.
After placing them in position, put on three cords, as shown in diagram,
numbered 1, 2 and 3. For this weft use linen thread, at Nos. 1, 2 and 3.

In commencing to weave, place the hair between two cards, as shown in
diagram, and draw out with the right hand, between the thumb and
fore-finger, the quantity of hair required for the size of the weft;
then change it into the left hand, and place it up to the threads, Nos.
1, 2 and 3, as shown in diagram; lay the strand over No. 1, under No. 2,
over No. 3, around under No. 3, over Nos. 2 and 1, around under Nos. 1
and 2, over No. 3, around under Nos. 3 and 2, and over No. 1. Then push
the strands together, as in cut.




[Illustration: SEWING SWITCHES.

No. 1. No. 2.]


The No. 1 of the above cuts represents the winding and sewing of the
switch after it is woven. For sewing a switch on points, after weaving,
take Berlin cord, about one-sixteenth of an inch thick, and tie a solid
knot at the end, and sew the end of the weft to the knotted end of the
cord; then wind the weft around the cord, as shown in cut, the length of
point desired, turning the end of the cord over to form a loop. Cut the
weft according to the number of points desired in the switch. Cut No. 2
shows the switch all complete.




WEAVING HAIR FOR CURLS.


[Illustration]

In commencing to weave, place the hair between two cards, or stiff
brushes, as shown in diagram, pressing them tight together, so that in
drawing out, it is perfectly free from tangles; draw out with the right
hand, between the thumb and fore-finger, the quantity of hair required
for the size of the weft; then change it into the left hand, and lift it
up to the No. 1 cord, as shown in diagram; lay the strand over No. 1,
under No. 2, over No. 3, around under No. 3, over Nos. 2 and 1, around
under Nos. 1 and 2, over No. 3, around under No. 3, over No. 2, and
under No. 1. Then push the strands together, as shown in diagram. For
this weft use fine, strong linen thread.




MAKING AND PREPARING CURLS.


[Illustration: No. 1.]

[Illustration: No. 2.]

After weaving, according to directions on page 241, take a piece of
ribbon an inch wide, the same color of hair, and as long as you wish the
curls to be in width, and sew the weft to it back and forth. After that
is done, pipe them, which is done in this manner: Dampen the hair, comb
each curl out straight, and wind it tightly on a rattan stick about four
inches long, having each curl on a separate stick, and commencing to
wind at the tip end, tying them firmly to keep in place. Then boil in
water for thirty minutes, and place in an oven as hot as they will bear
without burning, until quite dry. When dry and perfectly cool, take them
off the sticks, and smooth over a curling iron, the size you wish the
curls. Side curls and frizzes should be prepared the same way.

Cut No. 2 represents a set of Curls and Puffs. For explanation of Puffs,
see page 245.




WEAVING HAIR FOR WIGS.


[Illustration]

In commencing to weave, place the hair between two cards, or stiff
brushes, as shown in diagram, pressing them tight together, so that in
drawing out, it is perfectly free from tangles; draw out with the right
hand, between the thumb and fore-finger, the quantity of hair required
for the size of the weft; then change it into the left hand, and lift it
up to the No. 1 cord, as shown in diagram; lay the strand over No. 1,
under No. 2, over No. 3, around under No. 3, over Nos. 2 and 1, around
under Nos. 1 and 2, over No. 3, around under No. 3, over Nos. 2 and 1,
around under Nos. 1 and 2, over No. 3 around under Nos. 3 and 2, and
over No. 1. Then push the strands together, as shown in diagram. For
this weft use sewing silk.


WEAVING HAIR FOR WATERFALLS AND BOWS

Prepare the same as above, and place the strand under No. 1, over Nos. 2
and 3, around under Nos. 3 and 2, over No. 1, around under Nos. 1 and 2,
over No. 3, around under No. 3, and over Nos. 2 and 1. Aside from these
changes, follow directions given above.




MAKING WATERFALLS AND BOWS.


[Illustration: No. 1.]

[Illustration: No. 2.]

[Illustration: No. 3.]

In making a Chignon, you have first to make the cushion. Take the
combings or waste hair, which is of no other use, and place it between
the cards or stiff brushes, the same as for weaving. Use the weaving
apparatus, with two piping cords, instead of three small ones, and wind
the hair all up, by passing over, between and under the cords. Boil and
dry it, and then pull out the cord, which leaves it all crimped, ready
to weave, according to directions on page 239. Then sew it on a cord,
the same as a switch, and form it in any shape you desire, for a
Waterfall, Bow or Puffs. This completes the cushion. Then weave the long
hair for the covering, according to directions on page 243, and sew it
to the top end of the cushion; comb it out smooth, cover the cushion,
and tie a cord around it immediately at the bottom; then bring up the
end of the hair, and pin it to the inside. Cut No. 1 is intended to
represent the cushion, and No. 2 the complete Waterfall.

Cut No. 3 represents the Bow, which is made in the same manner, by using
two small cushions, like cut No. 1, and placing between them a strand of
smooth or braided hair.




MAKING PUFFS AND COILS.


[Illustration: No. 1.]

[Illustration: No. 2.]

[Illustration: No. 3.]

To make Puffs for front of head, from false hair, similar to cut No. 1,
weave hair from eight to twelve inches long, according to directions on
page 241; then take a ribbon, about one and a half inches wide, any
length required, and tack it on a wig block, or straight piece of board,
and sew the weft crossways a quarter of an inch apart, till the ribbon
is entirely covered; then divide it off in as many puffs as desired,
comb each out straight, and wind it over the two fore-fingers, close up
to ribbon, and put in a hair-pin to retain it.

To make Puffs for back of head, cut No. 2, prepare the same way; make
the foundation the shape and size you wish the puffs, and sew it on the
same way you want the puffs to run. The puffs may be made over a
cushion, formed of crimped hair the shape wanted, and wound over that
instead of the fingers. Ladies not wearing false hair, can have her own
hair dressed by following the above directions.

Cut No. 3 represents a coil, which is made from a switch, and wound over
a long roll of crimped hair. They are much nicer, but more expensive, by
being made altogether from a switch, as that can be twisted into a rope
or braided, before coiling.




EXPLANATIONS ON HAIR DRESSING.


I herewith present, on the following pages, a number of engravings
illustrative of a few of the many styles of Hair Dressing, accompanied
with explanatory remarks as to their execution. They are the latest and
most fashionable European and American styles, and will prove
indispensable to every lady's toilet, as, from the explanations, they
will be able, with very little practice, to dress their own hair in any
desired style; and when any new style is inaugurated, after studying and
practicing the directions given with each illustration, she will find it
an easy matter to arrange it accordingly.

Any one learning Hair Dressing, should acquire perfectly the execution
of the first pattern--the Promenade Head-Dress--as that is very easily
arranged, and when you have once executed it in a perfect manner, the
others will prove comparatively easy.

The manner of dressing the hair at the present day calls for much
attention, and many inquiries are addressed us on the subject. It is
plain, however, that what would correspond with the complexion and
physiognomy of one, would certainly have a distasteful appearance on
another; consequently, in answering inquiries, I can do nothing more
than give the different styles worn. Before giving my illustrations on
Hair Dressing, I have given instructions how to weave hair for chignons,
curls, switches, &c., and how to put them in shape, and with the
directions given with each illustration on Hair Dressing, it will
certainly be an easy task to arrange the hair in any style that is now
or may be in fashion.

[Illustration: PROMENADE HEAD-DRESS.]

Our first cut represents the Promenade Head-Dress, but is worn as
frequently in the drawing-room, and even at public and private
assemblies--in fact, a common and very pretty style.

EXPLANATION: Comb the front hair between the temples straight back, over
a cushion of crimped hair, forming a Chignon; then make two braids of
two small switches, and place one of them over the top of the Chignon,
and the other across the forehead, forming a diadem, turning the ends
under; then comb the hair from temples over the braids, and put back
under the Chignon, and fasten. Place a net of pearl or gilt beads over
the Chignon, as in cut. You can use false hair for covering cushion, if
desired.

[Illustration: RECEPTION HEAD-DRESS.]

This Head-Dress is a most charming composition, and entirely new. It is
adapted either for a brown or fair complexion, to be worn at grand
dinners or receptions. Ornamented with pearl or gilt, it is in good
taste for evening parties.

EXPLANATION: Curl the hair across forehead, or use false curls, combing
the hair straight back, and form a chignon of curls at the back. Place a
diadem plait across forehead, and raise the hair from the temples over
the plait. Trim with roses and ribbans, or to suit dress.

[Illustration: SOIREE OR EVENING HEAD-DRESS.]

This cut illustrates the Soiree or Evening Head-Dress. It is a very
unique and modern style, suited for almost any complexion, and very
easily executed.

EXPLANATION: Comb the hair straight back between the temples, tie it,
and curl the ends, or use a set of long false curls. Place a diadem
plait, made from a switch, across the forehead; then comb the hair back
from the temples, over the ends of the plait, twist it, pass it back
under the curls, and fasten firmly. Use a fancy back-comb on top of
curls, and pin an ornament to diadem plait, with feather and chain
attached, as in cut, or trim to suit dress.


[Illustration: GRAND EVENING PARTY HEAD-DRESS.]

A very graceful Head-Dress, of a bold style, suited for a young lady of
brown or fair complexion, and is in good taste to be worn at the theatre
or Grand Evening Parties.

EXPLANATION: Make a parting over the head, from ear to ear, two inches
from front; on the forehead, between the temples, curl the hair in small
friz curls, and from the temple to the ear, make loose puffs. Divide the
hair in three partings over the head, and roll each in a large puff;
then form a large puff of the back hair, round the nape of the neck, as
in cut. Fasten a large set of loose curls over the puff, with a comb or
other ornament. For reference, see page 245.

[Illustration: EMPRESS HEAD-DRESS.]

A charming Head-Dress, and entirely new, perfectly suiting a fair
complexion. It may serve for the theatre or evening parties. When
powdered it preferably suits a brown or brunette.

EXPLANATION: Make a front parting, and a cross one from ear to ear.
Divide each side into five parts; of the front parting make three puffs
on each side. The remaining four make into long puffs, as in cut,
according to explanations on page 245. The back hair may be arranged in
the same style of puffs, or with a double Chignon, placing a single,
long false curl or braid, back of each ear. Trim with orange leaves, or
to suit dress.


[Illustration: PARISIAN HEAD-DRESS.]

This Head-Dress, both bold and graceful, is suitable for any complexion
or age, when the physiognomy allows it.

EXPLANATION: Comb back the hair from the forehead between the temples,
make a large puff on the temples, and three puffs above each ear. Place
a cushion at the back of head, and comb the hair over it, forming a
chignon; then place a diadem plait, or twist, made from a large switch,
round on the top of head, trimmed with leaves or ribbon, as shown in
cut.


[Illustration: THE APOLLO HEAD-DRESS.]

This Head-Dress is one of the most graceful styles. It was worn in the
time of Louis XIVth, and well agrees with the fashion of the present
day. With some modifications, it is suited to every complexion.

EXPLANATION: Crimp the front hair, and raise it over the temples with a
puff comb. Comb the hair just above the ear back, and friz the ends, and
curl the back hair in large flowing curls, as shown in the cut.


[Illustration: THE MODERN HEAD-DRESS.]

A Head-Dress of elegant composition, coming down from antiquity,
suitable for a young and pretty woman, and perfectly agreeing with a
fair complexion.

EXPLANATION: Part the hair from temple to temple, one inch from front,
comb it up on the forehead, and curl the ends in small snap curls; then
comb the hair back from the temples, and form a loose puff. Make three
partings across the head, and form a puff of each. Of the back hair,
make a braided or plaited chignon, with a few friz curls underneath;
then make two puffs back of the ear, as shown in cut. Wear a fancy comb
or band over the top of chignon.


[Illustration: EVENING PROMENADE HEAD-DRESS.]

A Head-Dress of extraordinary simplicity, and of a most genteel kind,
becoming a dark complexion. It may be adapted for the opera by changing
the trimming.

EXPLANATION: First crimp all the hair, then place a cushion high up
under the hair at the back, forming a chignon, and friz the ends of the
hair from ear to ear under the chignon. Tuck the hair high up on the
forehead, place bands of ribbon over the head with a net at the back,
and bring the hair above the ear up, and fasten to the ribbon. Pin a
ribbon streamer to the net, as in cut.


[Illustration: THE SHEPHERDESS HEAD-DRESS.]

An elegant Head-Dress, and was worn in the time of Louis XVI, for balls
and evening parties, or as a disguise when powdered.

EXPLANATION: Separate the hair across the head from ear to ear, three
inches from front, and roll it in puffs according to directions on page
245. Do up the back hair in a double chignon, either with your own or
false hair; add a set of false curls underneath the chignon, extending
from ear to ear. Trim to suit dress with leaves, flowers and ribbon, as
shown in illustration.


[Illustration: COURT HEAD-DRESS.]

A rich Head-Dress, having a great stamp of distinction, and for that
reason will be adapted for a Court Head-Dress, or Grand Evening Parties.

EXPLANATION: Make a parting over the head from ear to ear, two inches
from front, and form a row of nine small puffs over the forehead. Comb
the remaining hair back, and divide into four partings around the head,
and form each parting in a large puff, as in cut. Add a few small friz
curls and orange blossoms between the puffs. For reference see page
245.


[Illustration: YOUNG BRIDE'S HEAD-DRESS.]

An exquisite Head-Dress, of a very graceful style, and well agreeing
with a fair or brown complexion, to be worn by a young bride, or at
grand assemblies.

EXPLANATION: Comb the hair back and place a set of small loose curls
across the forehead; place a diadem plait over the top of the curls, and
comb the hair off the temples over the ends of the plait, and form a
chignon or bow of the back hair, and place a three-strand braid around
the chignon, made either from the ends of hair from the temple or a
switch. Add a crown of white blossoms and a veil, as shown in the
engraving. If not for a bride, trim to match dress.


[Illustration: NEAPOLITAN HEAD-DRESS.]

An exquisite Head-Dress, of exceedingly graceful and modern style,
agreeing with nearly every complexion; may be worn as a promenade or at
small parties.

EXPLANATION: Part the hair from front to crown, and from ear to ear;
crimp the front, and braid the ends in a three-strand braid, and trim
the ends with ribbon. Either braid or twist the back hair, and form into
a coil. Place a small plait across the forehead, as shown in the
engraving. Deck the hair with flowers or beads, to suit the occasion.




SYNOPTIC OF HUMAN HAIR.


In placing before the public the only book ever published in the "Art of
Hair Work," it is but due to the purchasers of it to say something in
relation to the trade in Human Hair. It is not my intention, however, to
enter into an extended detail and complete history, but simply give a
few items that will serve to show what enormous strides have been taken
within the last few years in this branch of business. It is a business
that but few know anything about--at least in this country, for it is
comparatively new here--but it is one that is very rapidly increasing,
and is now almost doubling itself each year.

The larger quantity, in fact nearly the whole amount of hair retailed in
this country is imported from Europe, where the dealing in human hair
has been made an established and legitimate business for years, and a
great deal of attention is paid in purchasing and preparing it for the
market. Paris is the greatest market for the sale of human hair in the
world; but the amount of superfluous hair used and worn throughout all
Europe, could we give the figures, would seem incredible. The amount
imported to the United States in the years of 1859 and 1860 was not far
from 150,000 and 200,000 pounds, which was valued at that time at from
$800,000 to $1,000,000. Since that time it has been steadily increasing,
and the amount imported last year may be set down at three times as much
as during the years above mentioned. Paris also finds as great a sale
for the article in Russia as in America--the shipments to each being
about equal. Thus, it will be seen, that if all the hair reserved in
Europe for the home demand were added to that which is imported, the
amount would be almost beyond conception; and yet, but about one-tenth
part of the whole production ever leaves its native country.

It is mostly procured from the markets of France, Italy, Russia and
Germany, and large quantities are obtained from Norway and Sweden.

The Norwegians were among the first to make ornaments of hair to be worn
as jewelry, but, in a great measure, we are indebted to the French for
the perfection to which the art has attained. Of the different varieties
of hair, that which is obtained in France and Italy is by far the best,
being of a much finer texture, even color, and of a more glossy
appearance than that from other countries.

The principal requirement in hair to make it valuable is length, and
after it is thrown upon the market it is all assorted--the long from the
short--which is a task of extreme difficulty.

The prices of hair range all the way from $15 to $200 per pound, (a wide
range, but certainly not too large,) and is rated according to hue,
length and texture. The smallest price paid is for the short, coarse
hair of the poorest quality, and which can be used only for certain
purposes. Hair of the ordinary colors range in price from $15 to $100
per pound, but that of gray and white from $100 to $200 per pound, and
even then is not considered exorbitant. In fact, hair is worth any and
all prices. We know of one dealer who had in his possession a very small
quantity, weighing but a half pound and measuring seventy inches, for
which he was offered _four hundred dollars!_ and, strange as it may
appear, he refused to accept it. White hair is mostly obtained by being
picked from the gray, and it not unfrequently happens that many hundred
pounds have to be assorted before being able to secure one single pound
of pure white. It is mainly used in the manufacture of wigs, and it
frequently puzzles the dealer to prepare one for a customer that will
exactly match, and this, with the scarcity of the article, cause the
extraordinary price.

Hair is shipped in both a prepared and unprepared state. That which is
prepared undergoes a process of washing, scouring and cleansing, which
leaves it in the nicest possible state; all the oil, dirt and other
unhealthy substances are completely separated from it, leaving it
perfectly free from all unhealthy influences. That which is shipped in
an unprepared, or raw state, is subjected to the same process of
cleansing after its arrival, and it is so thorough that it is altogether
impossible for anything except the hair to remain. It has frequently
been examined with a microscope, which has proved in every case how
successful the cleansing process had been, for it revealed nothing
whatever of a foreign nature, and, in fact, after its extraordinary
cleaning it would be simply impossible.

After being fully prepared it is then made into switches, curls, plaits,
fronts, wigs, chignons, and not a small amount is used in the
manufacture of hair jewelry, and such other articles as are worn for
ornaments. The jewelry manufactured at this time is as durable as the
all gold jewelry, and is done in a style of surpassing neatness, thus
rendering it beautiful, either as an ornament or memento. There are but
very few places in the United States where hair jewelry is made, and as
it is comparatively a new business, but few have learned it. It is
surprising, however, to notice the many beautiful patterns and elegant
designs into which it is transformed. There is nothing in the way of
jewelry or ornament of any description but what is or may be made from
human hair; and, after being gold-mounted, the contrast between them
makes the hair jewelry preferable to the all gold.

There are many strange incidents related of the human hair suddenly
changing its color--many of which it is hard to believe--and the causes
assigned are various. We are told of persons who, from excessive grief,
found their hair had gradually changed from a dark brown to an almost
perfect white; others, from the same cause, in the short space of one
week discovered their hair plentifully streaked with grey, giving them
the appearance, although young, of being quite old. Many have had their
hair change on account of extreme fright, but we have now to give the
first instance we have ever heard of its turning from white to that of
any other color, except by the aid of dyes.

A Parisian, M. Stanislaus Martin, has published in the _Bulletin de
Therapeutique_ the curious case of a worker in metals who had wrought in
copper only five months, and whose hair, which was lately white, is now
of so decided a _green_ that the man cannot appear in the street without
immediately becoming the object of general curiosity. He is perfectly
well, his hair alone being affected by the copper, notwithstanding the
precautions taken by him to protect it from the action of the metal.
Chemical analysis shows that his hair contains a notable quantity of
acetate of copper, and that it is to this circumstance that it owes its
beautiful green color, which is most singular and remarkable.

The practice of wearing false hair, although it was not generally dealt
in as traffic, has been in vogue many hundred years. The Greek and Roman
ladies were, in olden times, as active in their toilet for the head as
the fashionable ladies of the present day, and false hair was always
brought into requisition, which was then obtained from the Germans, and
they in turn from their slaves.

Powdering the hair, which is now the rage in all fashionable circles, is
also an ancient practice, and was as much indulged in by the men as the
women. History tells us that the consumption of hair powder by the
soldiers of George II was enormous. It was calculated, that inasmuch as
the military force of England and the colonies was, including cavalry,
infantry, militia and fensibles, 250,000, each man used a pound of flour
a week, simply for powdering their hair. The quantity consumed in this
way was 6,500 tons per annum; an amount sufficient to sustain 30,000
persons on bread. Gold and silver hair powder was also plentifully used,
and at a time much earlier in the world's history, than is generally
supposed. Josephus relates that Solomon's horse-guards daily strewed
their heads with gold-dust, which glittered in the sun; and there are
similar instances of different personages recorded in the bible.

The human hair seems to have been given us both for an ornament and
covering--being susceptible of transformation in almost any desired
shape, and apparently indispensable for covering and protecting the
head. The ancient Greeks were very partial to long hair, considering it
by far the more becoming; but the Egyptians regarded it as an
incumbrance, shaved their heads, and substituted wigs. The ancients,
generally speaking, strangely considered a fine head of hair so
desirable, that it became sacred. They frequently dedicated it to the
gods, on important occasions of marriage, victory, escape from death and
danger, and the burial of friends. Different styles of wearing the hair,
was resorted to for denoting the various grades, or positions in life,
of the people, some wearing it quite long, others short, and some
dressing it in a peculiar manner,--each style, or length, being
according to the condition, wealth, or social standing of the wearer.
Plucking it out, or neglecting it, was a token of affliction.

Hair contains a very small quantity of water, manganese, iron, and
various salts of lime, which have been found by the various methods of
analyzation, and it is owing to these properties that it is peculiarly
indestructible. It has been found on mummies, more than twenty centuries
old, in a perfect and unaltered state, and many instances are related,
which are now admitted to be facts, of the hair continuing to grow, for
a time, after death.

There has never before been a book written and published, that was
particularly dedicated to the subject of Hair, and as the field is a
vast one, both as regards the importance of the subject, and the
information to be gained thereby, it is simply strange that no one has
ever entered it. It has been too long neglected, and the increasing
necessity for a treatise of this kind, has been pressed upon the
attention of the author, and induced the publication of this work, which
will certainly meet the necessities of the age.

There is much else that might be said on this subject that would prove
both interesting and instructive, but we prefer for the present to let
it rest. We have endeavored in preparing this book both to instruct and
amuse; for, by following its instructions, it may be made to be
profitable and highly remunerative, and in making articles, either for
gifts, mementoes, or otherwise, it will certainly be amusing and
entertaining. We have given the instructions in a way that all may
readily understand, and as the patterns are numerous, and the designs
elegant, we think there can be nothing lacking to make the book all it
claims to be.

The principal offices for the sale of these books, will be at my
establishments, No. 737 Broadway, New York, and No. 81 South Clark
Street, Chicago.

[Illustration]




RETAIL DEPARTMENT.


[Illustration]

In placing before the trade my list of Hair Jewelry and Hair Goods, I
beg sincerely to thank my customers for the increasing support I have
received from them, and let them be assured I shall do all on my part to
merit a continuance of the same. The following is a list of some of the
leading articles I import, manufacture and sell, at wholesale and
retail, and at prices less than can be found in any other House on this
continent. I import

    HUMAN HAIR OF THE FINEST QUALITY!

of every length and shade, prepared and unprepared, _which I furnish the
trade at low prices_:

  _Hair Jewelry, Gold Mountings for Hair Jewelry, Gent's Wigs and Toupees,
  Ladies' Wigs, Switches, Braids, Curls, Waterfalls, Frizettes, Coils, Bows,
  Fronts, Scratches, Bands, Hair-Nets, Ornamental Hair, Partings,
  Whiskers, Beards, Mustaches, Puffs, Curling-Irons,
  Curling-Sticks, Crimping-Irons, Perfumery, Pomades
  and Creams, Soaps, Hair Brushes, Combs,
  Hair Oils, Cosmetiques, Crimping-Pins._


"CHREVOLION," FOR THE HAIR!

For restoring the growth and natural color of the hair, and beautifying
the complexion.

    FACE POWDERS,
      ROUGES AND
        FRENCH ENAMEL.
          HAIR POWDERS--
            DIAMOND POWDER,
               GOLD POWDER,
                 SILVER POWDER.


Wig Material, and Tools of Every Description!

In conclusion, I again renew my thanks to my customers, and trust, by
the best attention to all orders, to give them increased satisfaction,
as well as to merit the support of any portion of the trade who have not
heretofore favored me with their commands. All orders sent by mail,
accompanied by a Post Office Certificate, will be promptly filled and a
safe return guaranteed.




WIG MANUFACTORY.

[Illustration]

WIGS! TOUPEES! SWITCHES! CURLS!


The great success I have met with, and the rapidly increasing demand for
Goods of my manufacture, is owing mainly to the superior quality of hair
which I import exclusively for my trade, and the superior workmanship in
their manufacture.


_WIGS! WIGS! WIGS! WIGS!_

I have the largest assortment of Wigs in the United States, and
manufacture to order any and every style.


GENT'S WIGS AND TOUPEES,

ventilated on Human Hair gauze or silk seams. Weft Wigs and Toupees,
with or without seams, of straight or natural curly hair.


LADIES' WIGS,

short or long glossy hair, straight, natural curly or frizzed. Also
Fronts and Bandoes.

[Illustration: Directions for Measuring the Head for a Wig.

No. 1--The circumference of the Head.

No. 2--From Forehead to Nape.

No. 3--From Ear to Ear, across the Forehead.

No. 4--From Ear to Ear, over the top of the Head.

No. 5--From Temple to Temple, round back of the Head.]

To measure for Toupee or Scratch, cut a piece of paper the exact size
and shape of bald spot. Send your orders according to the above
directions, and we will warrant a fit.


I OFFER TO THE PUBLIC THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT

of SWITCHES, CURLS, BRAIDS and FRIZZETTES, to be found in any
establishment in America, and

    DEFY COMPETITION IN QUALITY AND PRICE.




MANUFACTURING DEPARTMENT.

[Illustration: GOLD JEWELRY MANUFACTORY.]

[Illustration: HAIR BRAIDING ROOMS.]


I manufacture and sell, at WHOLESALE and RETAIL,

    HAIR JEWELRY
    AND
    _GOLD MOUNTINGS FOR HAIR JEWELRY_,
    OF EVERY PATTERN AND DEVICE,

to suit the fancy of my patrons. I have given years of study and
practical experience to this branch of my business, and have so
perfected and enlarged my MANUFACTURING FACILITIES, as to feel confident
of being able to give entire satisfaction, in workmanship and price. I
furnish or make the

    Gold Mountings for Hair Jewelry,

of any style or pattern desired. I also furnish the braids separate from
the mountings, or the two complete.

Persons buying books, and wishing to procure

    _BRAIDING TABLES,_
    _WEIGHTS,_
    _BOBBINS,_
    _MOULDS_
    _OR FORMS,_

will be supplied at very low rates. For the accommodation of my trade, I
have made arrangements to have braiding tools and material


MANUFACTURED IN VERY LARGE QUANTITIES,

which I will furnish at prices sufficient only to cover the cost of
manufacture and transportation.




CAMPBELL'S CHREVOLION.

[Illustration]


CAMPBELL'S CHREVOLION

FOR

_Restoring the COLOR and Growth of the Hair, Purifying, Whitening and
Beautifying the Complexion._


IT IS A PREVENTIVE AND SURE CURE FOR BALDNESS,

_Cleansing the Scalp of Dandruff and all Impurities, Invigorating the
Roots of the Hair, giving it Life, Health, and its_

    NATURAL COLOR.


IT IS A SURE CURE FOR ROUGH SKIN, FRECKLES, SUNBURN, AND ALL IMPURITIES
OF THE COMPLEXION.




CAMPBELL'S CHREVOLION.

[Illustration: M. Campbell's Chrevolion Manufactory.]

[Illustration: BEFORE USING]

[Illustration: AFTER USING]

M. CAMPBELL'S CHREVOLION NO. 1, FOR _Restoring the Hair to its Natural
Color_.


This wonderful Preparation needs only to be used to be appreciated. It
is free from those objections that accompany preparations compounded
from minerals, which have been offered to the public in

    Imitation of Chrevolion.

      It will restore the natural color of the Hair with but
      two or three applications. It is a common practice
      with compounders, when presenting an article to the
      public, to advertise an array of testimonials
      purporting to be from distinguished persons, but I
      prefer to rest the success of the Chrevolion strictly
      upon its efficacious merit,

    KNOWING IT WILL DO ALL THAT IS CLAIMED.

[Illustration: Pointing hand] Sold by all the principal Druggists in this
country, and prepared by M. CAMPBELL, Broadway, N. Y., and South Clark
street, Chicago, Ill.




CAMPBELL'S CHREVOLION.

[Illustration: Ladies' Hair Dressing.]

[Illustration: BEFORE USING.]

[Illustration: AFTER USING.]

CHREVOLION No. 2, FOR PURIFYING AND WHITENING THE COMPLEXION AND

_Restoring the Growth of the Hair_.


This Complexion Purifyer is a Magical Curative for the Face and Scalp.
It will allay all Feverish Humor of the Skin, and remove Freckles,
Pimples Sunburn and other eruptions, leaving the Face soft, white and
beautiful, with

    _BUT TWO OR THREE APPLICATIONS_.

      Hundreds of cases, where the Hair was dropping, and
      Baldness seemed inevitable, have been effectually
      cured by the use of the Chrevolion.


PREPARED ONLY BY M. CAMPBELL.

Sold by all the principal Druggists in this country. Price $1.00 per
Bottle.




HAIR JEWELRY.

PRICE LIST.


    No.     Mount's.    Compl't.
    1       $ 5 50      $ 8 00
    2         3 75        6 00
    3         3 00        5 00
    4         5 25        8 00
    5         4 00        7 00
    6         4 50        7 00
    7         6 00       10 00
    8         5 50        8 00
    9        11 00       15 00
    10       10 00       12 50
    11        5 75        8 00
    12        5 00        7 00
    13        8 00       10 00
    14        6 00        8 00
    15        4 50        6 00
    16        9 00       10 00
    17        7 50       10 00
    18        6 50        8 00
    19       10 00       12 50
    20        9 00       12 50
    21        7 50       10 00
    22       10 00       12 50
    23        8 00       10 00
    24        7 50       10 00
    25       10 00       15 00
    26       12 50       15 00
    27        4 00        7 00
    28        4 00        8 00
    29       10 00       12 50
    30       10 00       12 50
    31       15 00       17 50
    32       15 00       17 50
    33       12 50       15 00
    34       12 50       15 00
    35       12 50       15 00
    36       12 50       15 00
    37       13 00       15 00
    38       11 00       12 50
    39       13 00       15 00
    40       13 00       15 00
    41       12 50       15 00
    42       11 00       12 50
    43       10 00       12 50
    44        8 00       10 00
    45        6 50        8 00
    46        6 50        8 00
    47        8 50       10 00
    48       10 00       12 00
    49        4 00        5 00
    50        4 00        5 00
    51        3 50        5 00
    52        7 00        8 00
    53        5 00        6 00
    54        6 50        8 00
    55       10 00       12 00
    56        5 00        6 00
    57        5 50        6 00
    58        7 00        8 00
    59        6 50        8 00
    60        8 50       10 00
    61        8 00       10 00
    62        6 00        7 00
    63       12 50       15 00
    64       15 00       17 50
    65       12 50       15 00
    66       15 00       17 50
    67       12 50       15 00
    68       12 50       15 00
    69       13 00       15 00
    70       11 00       12 50
    71       13 00       15 00
    72       13 00       15 00
    73       12 50       15 00
    74       11 00       12 50
    75       10 00       12 50
    76        8 00       10 00
    77        6 50        8 00
    78        6 50        8 00
    79        8 50       10 00
    80       10 00       13 00
    81       10 00       12 50
    82        8 00       10 00
    83       13 00       15 00
    84        6 00        8 00
    85        8 00       10 00
    86       10 00       12 50
    87        8 00       10 00
    88        6 50        8 00
    89       10 00       12 00
    90        8 00       10 00
    91        6 00        8 00
    92        4 50        6 00
    93       12 50       15 00
    94        6 00        8 00
    95       13 00       15 00
    96       12 00       15 00
    97       10 00       12 50
    98       10 00       12 50
    99       10 00       12 00
    100       5 00        7 00
    101       8 00       10 00
    102      12 50       15 00
    103       8 00        10 00
    104      10 00        12 00
    105       7 00         9 00
    106       6 00         8 00
    107       7 00         8 00
    108       6 00         7 00
    109       9 00        10 00
    110       6 00         7 00
    111      12 00        15 00
    112      13 00        15 00
    113      13 00        15 00
    114      12 00        15 00
    115       4 50         6 00
    116       4 00         5 00
    117       5 00         7 00
    118       5 00         7 00
    119       7 00         8 00
    120       5 00         6 00
    121       5 00         6 00
    122       7 00         8 00
    123       9 00        10 00
    124       6 00         7 00
    125       5 00         6 00
    126       6 00         7 00
    127       4 50         5 00
    128       7 00         8 00
    129       4 50         5 00
    130       5 00         6 00
    131       7 00         8 00
    132       5 50         6 00
    133       5 00         6 00
    134       5 50         6 00
    135       6 00         7 00
    136       5 50         6 00
    137       4 00         5 00
    138       4 25         5 00
    139       4 25         5 00
    140       6 00         8 00
    141       6 00         7 00
    142       5 00         6 00
    143       4 00         5 00
    144       3 00         5 00
    145       2 50         3 50
    146       4 00         5 00
    147       6 50         8 00
    148       4 00         5 00
    149       8 00        10 00
    150      10 00        12 00
    151       4 25         5 00
    152      10 00        12 00
    153       3 50         4 00
    154       3 50         4 00
    155       4 00         5 00
    156       5 25         6 00
    157       3 50         4 00
    158       3 50         4 50
    159       5 00         6 00
    160       3 00         3 50
    161       4 00         5 00
    162       3 50         4 00
    163       5 00         6 00
    164       4 50         5 00
    165       5 00         6 00
    166       4 00         4 50
    167       6 00         7 00
    168       4 00         4 50
    169       7 00         8 00
    170       6 00         7 00
    171       1 00         1 50
    172       4 50         5 00
    173      11 00        12 00
    174       3 50         4 00
    175       1 00         1 50
    176       9 50        10 00
    177       5 50         6 00
    178       3 00         4 00
    179       6 00         7 00
    180       1 50         2 00
    181       6 00         7 00
    182       2 50         3 00
    183       6 00         7 00
    184       4 50         5 00
    185       6 00         7 00
    186       4 50         5 00
    187       7 50         8 00
    188       5 50         6 00
    189       9 00        10 00
    190      11 00        12 00
    191       9 00        10 00
    192       3 50         5 00
    193       8 50        10 00
    194       3 50         5 00
    195      10 00        15 00
    196       5 00         8 00
    197       4 50         7 00
    198       4 00         6 00
    199       4 00         6 00
    200       6 00        10 00
    201      10 00        10 00
    202      12 00        15 00
    203      10 00        12 00
    204       6 50         8 00
    205       4 00         5 00
    206      10 00        12 00
    207       8 00        10 00
    208      10 00        12 00
    209       6 50         8 00
    210      12 00        13 00
    211       8 50        10 00
    212       9 00        10 00
    213       8 50        10 00
    214      10 00        12 00
    215       8 50        10 00
    216       6 00         7 00
    217      13 00        15 00
    218      13 00        15 00
    219       8 50        10 00
    220       8 50        10 00
    221       7 00         8 00
    222      10 00        12 00
    223       7 00         8 00
    224       8 50        10 00
    225       10 50        12 00
    226        8 50        10 00
    227       10 50        12 00
    228       14 00        15 00
    229       10 00        10 00
    230       14 00        15 00
    231        8 50        10 00
    232        8 50        10 00
    233       10 00        12 00
    234        7 50         9 00
    235        7 50         9 00
    236        6 75         8 00
    237        2 25         6 00
    238       11 00        15 00
    239        5 00        10 00
    240        3 50         7 00
    241        3 50         6 00
    242        4 50         7 00
    243        6 00         8 00
    244       12 00        20 00
    245       20 00        28 00
    246        8 00        12 00
    247        8 00        12 00
    248        8 00        10 00
    249       10 00        12 00
    250       25 00        30 00
    251       25 00        30 00
    252       13 00        15 00
    253        8 00        12 00
    254       18 00        20 00
    255       10 00        12 00
    256       12 00        15 00
    257        8 00        10 00
    258       10 00        12 00
    259        9 50        12 00
    260       10 00        12 00
    261       10 00        12 00
    262        8 00        10 00
    263       16 00        20 00
    264       10 00        12 00
    265       21 00        25 00
    266       25 00        30 00
    267        6 00         8 00
    268       20 00        25 00
    269       10 00        12 00
    270        3 50         6 00
    271        4 00         7 00
    272        4 50         8 00
    273        4 00         6 00
    274        9 00        12 00
    275        9 00        12 00
    276        7 50        10 00
    277        3 50         6 00
    278       18 00        20 00
    279       18 00        20 00
    280       17 00        20 00
    281        9 00        12 00
    282       12 00        15 00
    283        9 00        12 00
    284       16 00        20 00
    285       30 00        40 00
    286        9 00        12 00
    287        9 00        14 00
    288        4 50         6 00
    289        4 00         7 00
    290       18 00        20 00
    291       22 00        25 00
    292                     6 50
    293                     6 00
    294                     4 00
    295                     5 00
    296                     4 50
    297                     5 50
    298                     8 00
    299                     6 00
    300                     2 25
    301                     4 50
    302                     2 50
    303                     7 50
    304                     6 00
    305       18 00        20 00
    306       18 00        20 00
    307       23 00        25 00
    308       15 00        17 50
    309       22 00        25 00
    310       12 00        15 00
    311       23 00        25 00
    312       18 00        20 00
    313       23 00        25 00
    314       12 00        15 00
    315       15 00        18 00
    316       22 00        25 00
    317       18 00        20 00




INDEX.


    TITLE.                                      PAGE.

    Preface, 5

    Introductory Remarks, 7

    Position in Braiding, 8

    Square Chain Braid, 9

    Reverse Braid, 10

    Sixteen Twist Chain Braid, 11

    Striped Snake Chain Braid, 12

    Cable Chain Braid, 13

    Snake Chain Braid, 14

    Eight Square Chain Braid, 15

    Half Twist Chain Braid, 16

    Square Chain Braid, 17

    Cable Twist Chain Braid, 18

    Twist Chain Braid, 19 to 20

    Rib Chain Braid, 21

    Twist Chain Braid, 22

    Half Twist Chain Braid, 23

    Cable Chain Braid, 24

    Sixteen Square Chain Braid, 25

    German Twist Chain Braid, 26

    Fancy Square Chain Braid, 27 to 28

    Square Chain Braid, 29

    Fancy Twist Chain Braid, 30 to 32

    Double Chain Braid, 33

    Fancy Cable Chain Braid, 34

    Half Square Chain Braid, 35

    Twelve Square Chain Braid, 36

    Flat Twist Chain Braid, 37

    Rib Chain Braid, 38

    Fancy Cable Chain Braid, 39

    Square Chain Braid, 40

    Fob Chain Braid, 41

    Square Rib Chain Braid, 42

    Double Loop Chain Braid, 43

    Knot Chain Braid, 44

    Double Rib Chain Braid, 45

    Fancy Chain Braid, 46 to 51

    Double Rib Chain Braid, 52

    Rope Chain Braid, 53

    Diamond Shaped Chain Braid, 54

    Fancy Square Chain Braid, 55 to 58

    Fancy Twist Chain Braid, 59

    Flat Chain Braid, 60

    Necklace Pattern Braid, 61 to 67

    Necklace or Edging Braid, 68

    Necklace or Head Dress Braid, 69

    Ring Pattern Braids, 70 to 81

    Ring or Bracelet Braids, 82 to 84

    Bracelet Tight Braids, 85 to 87

    Elastic Bracelet Braids, 88 to 89

    Double Elastic Bracelet Braid, 90

    Fancy Tight Bracelet Braid, 91

    Reverse Tight Bracelet Braid, 92

    Banded Tight Bracelet Braid, 93

    Plain Open Braid, 94

    Open Fine Braid, 95

    Open Fine Braid, 96

    Open Fine Lace Braid, 97 to 98

    Basket Tight Braid, 99

    Tight Braid, 100

    Acorn Tight Braid, 101

    Half Tight Braid, 102

    Fancy Tight Braid, 103

    Plain Tight Braid, 104

    Acorn Braid, 105

    Half Open Braid, 106

    Overshot Braid, 107

    Diamond Tight Braid, 108

    Spiral Striped Braid, 109

    Empress Tight Braid, 110

    Open Check Braid, 111

    Scotch Plaid Braid, 112

    Half Open Braid, 113

    Open Striped Braid, 114

    Chinchilla Open Braid, 115

    Fancy Lace Braid, 116

    Striped Elastic Braid, 117

    Open Striped Braid, 118

    Wide Striped Braid, 119

    Neapolitan Tight Braid, 120

    Open Braid, 121

    Directions for New Beginners, 122

    Braiding Table No. 1, 123

    Braiding Table No. 2, 124

    Braiding Table and position in Braiding, 125

    Wood Braiding Bobbins, 127

    Lead Braiding Bobbins, 128

    Lead Weight Bobbins, 129

    Forms for Braiding Over, 130 to 131

    Explanations on Bracelets, 132 to 136

    Lithograph Designs, 137 to 238

    Weaving Hair for Switches, 239

    Sewing Switches, 240

    Weaving Hair for Curls, 241

    Making and Preparing Curls, 242

    Weaving Hair for Wigs, 243

    Making Waterfalls or Bows, 244

    Making Puffs and Coils, 245

    Explanations on Hair Dressing, 246

    Hair Dressing, 247 to 259

    Synoptic of Human Hair, 260 to 265

    Retail Department, 266

    Wig Manufactory, 267

    Manufacturing Department, 268

    Campbell's Chrevolion, 269

    Campbell's Chrevolion, No. 1, 270

    Campbell's Chrevolion, No. 2, 271

    Price List, 272 to 274

    Index, 275 to 276

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Some patterns began with small caps and some did not. For the sake of
consistancy, all patterns now begin with small caps. This will show up
as ALL CAPS in the text version.

Index, the page numbers were missing and the transcriber supplied them
for the following entries: Preface; Introductory Remarks; Position in
Braiding; and Square Chain Braid.

Page 10, repeated word "and" removed from text. Original read (and and
lift over table)

Page 13, "very" changed to "vary" (vary the size of the braid)

Page 36, 43, "t" changed to "it" (Keep it fast)

Page 50, "ocross" changed to "across" (B over across Nos. 2)

Page 127, "srtand" changed to "strand" (four hairs in a strand)

Page 246, "llustrative" changed to "illustrative" (engravings
illustrative of a)

Page 251, "prefably" changed to "preferably" (it preferably suits a
brown)

Page 271, "effectualy" changed to "effectually" (been effectually cured
by)

Page 272, missing "3" added to table, fourth line

    (3         3 00        5 00)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Self-Instructor in the Art of Hair Work, by 
Mark Campbell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELF-INSTRUCTOR IN ART OF HAIR WORK ***

***** This file should be named 38658.txt or 38658.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/6/5/38658/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
