The Project Gutenberg EBook of The River's End, by James Oliver Curwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The River's End

Author: James Oliver Curwood

Posting Date: September 6, 2009 [EBook #4747]
Release Date: December, 2003
First Posted: March 12, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RIVER'S END ***




Produced by Dianne Bean.  HTML version by Al Haines.










THE RIVER'S END

James Oliver Curwood


JTABLE 10 25 1

THE RIVER'S END




I


Between Conniston, of His Majesty's Royal Northwest Mounted Police, and
Keith, the outlaw, there was a striking physical and facial
resemblance. Both had observed it, of course. It gave them a sort of
confidence in each other. Between them it hovered in a subtle and
unanalyzed presence that was constantly suggesting to Conniston a line
of action that would have made him a traitor to his oath of duty. For
nearly a month he had crushed down the whispered temptings of this
thing between them. He represented the law. He was the law. For
twenty-seven months he had followed Keith, and always there had been in
his mind that parting injunction of the splendid service of which he
was a part--"Don't come back until you get your man, dead or alive."
Otherwise--

A racking cough split in upon his thoughts. He sat up on the edge of
the cot, and at the gasping cry of pain that came with the red stain of
blood on his lips Keith went to him and with a strong arm supported his
shoulders. He said nothing, and after a moment Conniston wiped the
stain away and laughed softly, even before the shadow of pain had faded
from his eyes. One of his hands rested on a wrist that still bore the
ring-mark of a handcuff. The sight of it brought him back to grim
reality. After all, fate was playing whimsically as well as tragically
with their destinies.

"Thanks, old top," he said. "Thanks."

His fingers closed over the manacle-marked wrist.

Over their heads the arctic storm was crashing in a mighty fury, as if
striving to beat down the little cabin that had dared to rear itself in
the dun-gray emptiness at the top of the world, eight hundred miles
from civilization. There were curious waitings, strange screeching
sounds, and heart-breaking meanings in its strife, and when at last its
passion died away and there followed a strange quiet, the two men could
feel the frozen earth under their feet shiver with the rumbling
reverberations of the crashing and breaking fields of ice out in
Hudson's Bay. With it came a dull and steady roar, like the incessant
rumble of a far battle, broken now and then--when an ice mountain split
asunder--with a report like that of a sixteen-inch gun. Down through
the Roes Welcome into Hudson's Bay countless billions of tons of ice
were rending their way like Hunnish armies in the break-up.

"You'd better lie down," suggested Keith.

Conniston, instead, rose slowly to his feet and went to a table on
which a seal-oil lamp was burning. He swayed a little as he walked. He
sat down, and Keith seated himself opposite him. Between them lay a
worn deck of cards. As Conniston fumbled them in his fingers, he looked
straight across at Keith and grinned.

"It's queer, devilish queer," he said.

"Don't you think so, Keith?" He was an Englishman, and his blue eyes
shone with a grim, cold humor. "And funny," he added.

"Queer, but not funny," partly agreed Keith.

"Yes, it is funny," maintained Conniston. "Just twenty-seven months
ago, lacking three days, I was sent out to get you, Keith. I was told
to bring you in dead or alive--and at the end of the twenty-sixth month
I got you, alive. And as a sporting proposition you deserve a hundred
years of life instead of the noose, Keith, for you led me a chase that
took me through seven different kinds of hell before I landed you. I
froze, and I starved, and I drowned. I haven't seen a white woman's
face in eighteen months. It was terrible. But I beat you at last.
That's the jolly good part of it, Keith--I beat you and GOT you, and
there's the proof of it on your wrists this minute. I won. Do you
concede that? You must be fair, old top, because this is the last big
game I'll ever play." There was a break, a yearning that was almost
plaintive, in his voice.

Keith nodded. "You won," he said.

"You won so square that when the frost got your lung--"

"You didn't take advantage of me," interrupted Conniston. "That's the
funny part of it, Keith. That's where the humor comes in. I had you all
tied up and scheduled for the hangman when--bing!--along comes a cold
snap that bites a corner of my lung, and the tables are turned. And
instead of doing to me as I was going to do to you, instead of killing
me or making your getaway while I was helpless--Keith--old pal--YOU'VE
TRIED TO NURSE ME BACK TO LIFE! Isn't that funny? Could anything be
funnier?"

He reached a hand across the table and gripped Keith's. And then, for a
few moments, he bowed his head while his body was convulsed by another
racking cough. Keith sensed the pain of it in the convulsive clutching
of Conniston's fingers about his own. When Conniston raised his face,
the red stain was on his lips again.

"You see, I've got it figured out to the day," he went on, wiping away
the stain with a cloth already dyed red. "This is Thursday. I won't see
another Sunday. It'll come Friday night or some time Saturday. I've
seen this frosted lung business a dozen times. Understand? I've got two
sure days ahead of me, possibly a third. Then you'll have to dig a hole
and bury me. After that you will no longer be held by the word of honor
you gave me when I slipped off your manacles. And I'm asking you--WHAT
ARE YOU GOING TO DO?"

In Keith's face were written deeply the lines of suffering and of
tragedy. Yesterday they had compared ages.

He was thirty-eight, only a little younger than the man who had run him
down and who in the hour of his achievement was dying. They had not put
the fact plainly before. It had been a matter of some little
embarrassment for Keith, who at another time had found it easier to
kill a man than to tell this man that he was going to die. Now that
Conniston had measured his own span definitely and with most amazing
coolness, a load was lifted from Keith's shoulders. Over the table they
looked into each other's eyes, and this time it was Keith's fingers
that tightened about Conniston's. They looked like brothers in the
sickly glow of the seal-oil lamp.

"What are you going to do?" repeated Conniston.

Keith's face aged even as the dying Englishman stared at him. "I
suppose--I'll go back," he said heavily.

"You mean to Coronation Gulf? You'll return to that stinking mess of
Eskimo igloos? If you do, you'll go mad!"

"I expect to," said Keith. "But it's the only thing left. You know
that. You of all men must know how they've hunted me. If I went south--"

It was Conniston's turn to nod his head, slowly and thoughtfully. "Yes,
of course," he agreed. "They're hunting you hard, and you're giving 'em
a bully chase. But they'll get you, even up there. And I'm--sorry."

Their hands unclasped. Conniston filled his pipe and lighted it. Keith
noticed that he held the lighted taper without a tremor. The nerve of
the man was magnificent.

"I'm sorry," he said again. "I--like you. Do you know, Keith, I wish
we'd been born brothers and you hadn't killed a man. That night I
slipped the ring-dogs on you I felt almost like a devil. I wouldn't say
it if it wasn't for this bally lung. But what's the use of keeping it
back now? It doesn't seem fair to keep a man up in that place for three
years, running from hole to hole like a rat, and then take him down for
a hanging. I know it isn't fair in your case. I feel it. I don't mean
to be inquisitive, old chap, but I'm not believing Departmental 'facts'
any more. I'd make a topping good wager you're not the sort they make
you out. And so I'd like to know--just why--you killed Judge Kirkstone?"

Keith's two fists knotted in the center of the table. Conniston saw his
blue eyes darken for an instant with a savage fire. In that moment
there came a strange silence over the cabin, and in that silence the
incessant and maddening yapping of the little white foxes rose shrilly
over the distant booming and rumbling of the ice.




II


"Why did I kill Judge Kirkstone?" Keith repeated the words slowly.

His clenched hands relaxed, but his eyes held the steady glow of fire.
"What do the Departmental 'facts' tell you, Conniston?"

"That you murdered him in cold blood, and that the honor of the Service
is at stake until you are hung."

"There's a lot in the view-point, isn't there? What if I said I didn't
kill Judge Kirkstone?"

Conniston leaned forward a little too eagerly. The deadly paroxysm
shook his frame again, and when it was over his breath came pantingly,
as if hissing through a sieve. "My God, not Sunday--or Saturday," he
breathed. "Keith, it's coming TOMORROW!"

"No, no, not then," said Keith, choking back something that rose in his
throat. "You'd better lie down again."

Conniston gathered new strength. "And die like a rabbit? No, thank you,
old chap! I'm after facts, and you can't lie to a dying man. Did you
kill Judge Kirkstone?"

"I--don't--know," replied Keith slowly, looking steadily into the
other's eyes. "I think so, and yet I am not positive. I went to his
home that night with the determination to wring justice from him or
kill him. I wish you could look at it all with my eyes, Conniston. You
could if you had known my father. You see, my mother died when I was a
little chap, and my father and I grew up together, chums. I don't
believe I ever thought of him as just simply a father. Fathers are
common. He was more than that. From the time I was ten years old we
were inseparable. I guess I was twenty before he told me of the deadly
feud that existed between him and Kirkstone, and it never troubled me
much--because I didn't think anything would ever come of it--until
Kirkstone got him. Then I realized that all through the years the old
rattlesnake had been watching for his chance. It was a frame-up from
beginning to end, and my father stepped into the trap. Even then he
thought that his political enemies, and not Kirkstone, were at the
bottom of it. We soon discovered the truth. My father got ten years. He
was innocent. And the only man on earth who could prove his innocence
was Kirkstone, the man who was gloating like a Shylock over his pound
of flesh. Conniston, if you had known these things and had been in my
shoes, what would you have done?"

Conniston, lighting another taper over the oil flame, hesitated and
answered: "I don't know yet, old chap. What did you do?"

"I fairly got down on my knees to the scoundrel," resumed Keith. "If
ever a man begged for another man's life, I begged for my father's--for
the few words from Kirkstone that would set him free. I offered
everything I had in the world, even my body and soul. God, I'll never
forget that night! He sat there, fat and oily, two big rings on his
stubby fingers--a monstrous toad in human form--and he chuckled and
laughed at me in his joy, as though I were a mountebank playing amusing
tricks for him--and there my soul was bleeding itself out before his
eyes! And his son came in, fat and oily and accursed like his father,
and HE laughed at me. I didn't know that such hatred could exist in the
world, or that vengeance could bring such hellish joy. I could still
hear their gloating laughter when I stumbled out into the night. It
haunted me. I heard it in the trees. It came in the wind. My brain was
filled with it--and suddenly I turned back, and I went into that house
again without knocking, and I faced the two of them alone once more in
that room. And this time, Conniston, I went back to get justice--or to
kill. Thus far it was premeditated, but I went with my naked hands.
There was a key in the door, and I locked it. Then I made my demand. I
wasted no words--"

Keith rose from the table and began to pace back and forth. The wind
had died again. They could hear the yapping of the foxes and the low
thunder of the ice.

"The son began it," said Keith. "He sprang at me. I struck him. We
grappled, and then the beast himself leaped at me with some sort of
weapon in his hand. I couldn't see what it was, but it was heavy. The
first blow almost broke my shoulder. In the scuffle I wrenched it from
his hand, and then I found it was a long, rectangular bar of copper
made for a paper-weight. In that same instant I saw the son snatch up a
similar object from the table, and in the act he smashed the table
light. In darkness we fought. I did not feel that I was fighting men.
They were monsters and gave me the horrible sensation of being in
darkness with crawling serpents. Yes, I struck hard. And the son was
striking, and neither of us could see. I felt my weapon hit, and it was
then that Kirkstone crumpled down with a blubbery wheeze. You know what
happened after that. The next morning only one copper weight was found
in that room. The son had done away with the other. And the one that
was left was covered with Kirkstone's blood and hair. There was no
chance for me. So I got away. Six months later my father died in
prison, and for three years I've been hunted as a fox is hunted by the
hounds. That's all, Conniston. Did I kill Judge Kirkstone? And, if I
killed him, do you think I'm sorry for it, even though I hang?"

"Sit down!"

The Englishman's voice was commanding. Keith dropped back to his seat,
breathing hard. He saw a strange light in the steely blue eyes of
Conniston.

"Keith, when a man knows he's going to live, he is blind to a lot of
things. But when he knows he's going to die, it's different. If you had
told me that story a month ago, I'd have taken you down to the hangman
just the same. It would have been my duty, you know, and I might have
argued you were lying. But you can't lie to me--now. Kirkstone deserved
to die. And so I've made up my mind what you're going to do. You're not
going back to Coronation Gulf. You're going south. You're going back
into God's country again. And you're not going as John Keith, the
murderer, but as Derwent Conniston of His Majesty's Royal Northwest
Mounted Police! Do you get me, Keith? Do you understand?"

Keith simply stared. The Englishman twisted a mustache, a half-humorous
gleam in his eyes. He had been thinking of this plan of his for some
time, and he had foreseen just how it would take Keith off his feet.

"Quite a scheme, don't you think, old chap? I like you. I don't mind
saying I think a lot of you, and there isn't any reason on earth why
you shouldn't go on living in my shoes. There's no moral objection. No
one will miss me. I was the black sheep back in England--younger
brother and all that--and when I had to choose between Africa and
Canada, I chose Canada. An Englishman's pride is the biggest fool thing
on earth, Keith, and I suppose all of them over there think I'm dead.
They haven't heard from me in six or seven years. I'm forgotten. And
the beautiful thing about this scheme is that we look so deucedly
alike, you know. Trim that mustache and beard of yours a little, add a
bit of a scar over your right eye, and you can walk in on old McDowell
himself, and I'll wager he'll jump up and say, 'Bless my heart, if it
isn't Conniston!' That's all I've got to leave you, Keith, a dead man's
clothes and name. But you're welcome. They'll be of no more use to me
after tomorrow."

"Impossible!" gasped Keith. "Conniston, do you know what you are
saying?"

"Positively, old chap. I count every word, because it hurts when I
talk. So you won't argue with me, please. It's the biggest sporting
thing that's ever come my way. I'll be dead. You can bury me under this
floor, where the foxes can't get at me. But my name will go on living
and you'll wear my clothes back to civilization and tell McDowell how
you got your man and how he died up here with a frosted lung. As proof
of it you'll lug your own clothes down in a bundle along with any other
little identifying things you may have, and there's a sergeancy
waiting. McDowell promised it to you--if you got your man. Understand?
And McDowell hasn't seen me for two years and three months, so if I
MIGHT look a bit different to him, it would be natural, for you and I
have been on the rough edge of the world all that time. The jolly good
part of it all is that we look so much alike. I say the idea is
splendid!"

Conniston rose above the presence of death in the thrill of the great
gamble he was projecting. And Keith, whose heart was pounding like an
excited fist, saw in a flash the amazing audacity of the thing that was
in Conniston's mind, and felt the responsive thrill of its
possibilities. No one down there would recognize in him the John Keith
of four years ago. Then he was smooth-faced, with shoulders that
stooped a little and a body that was not too strong. Now he was an
animal! A four years' fight with the raw things of life had made him
that, and inch for inch he measured up with Conniston. And Conniston,
sitting opposite him, looked enough like him to be a twin brother. He
seemed to read the thought in Keith's mind. There was an amused glitter
in his eyes.

"I suppose it's largely because of the hair on our faces," he said.
"You know a beard can cover a multitude of physical sins--and
differences, old chap. I wore mine two years before I started out after
you, vandyked rather carefully, you understand, so you'd better not use
a razor. Physically you won't run a ghost of a chance of being caught.
You'll look the part. The real fun is coming in other ways. In the next
twenty-four hours you've got to learn by heart the history of Derwent
Conniston from the day he joined the Royal Mounted. We won't go back
further than that, for it wouldn't interest you, and ancient history
won't turn up to trouble you. Your biggest danger will be with
McDowell, commanding F Division at Prince Albert. He's a human fox of
the old military school, mustaches and all, and he can see through
boiler-plate. But he's got a big heart. He has been a good friend of
mine, so along with Derwent Conniston's story you've got to load up
with a lot about McDowell, too. There are many things--OH, GOD--"

He flung a hand to his chest. Grim horror settled in the little cabin
as the cough convulsed him. And over it the wind shrieked again,
swallowing up the yapping of the foxes and the rumble of the ice.

That night, in the yellow sputter of the seal-oil lamp, the fight
began. Grim-faced--one realizing the nearness of death and struggling
to hold it back, the other praying for time--two men went through the
amazing process of trading their identities. From the beginning it was
Conniston's fight. And Keith, looking at him, knew that in this last
mighty effort to die game the Englishman was narrowing the slight
margin of hours ahead of him. Keith had loved but one man, his father.
In this fight he learned to love another, Conniston. And once he cried
out bitterly that it was unfair, that Conniston should live and he
should die. The dying Englishman smiled and laid a hand on his, and
Keith felt that the hand was damp with a cold sweat.

Through the terrible hours that followed Keith felt the strength and
courage of the dying man becoming slowly a part of himself. The thing
was epic. Conniston, throttling his own agony, was magnificent. And
Keith felt his warped and despairing soul swelling with a new life and
a new hope, and he was thrilled by the thought of what he must do to
live up to the mark of the Englishman. Conniston's story was of the
important things first. It began with his acquaintance with McDowell.
And then, between the paroxysms that stained his lips red, he filled in
with incident and smiled wanly as he told how McDowell had sworn him to
secrecy once in the matter of an incident which the chief did not want
the barracks to know--and laugh over. A very sensitive man in some ways
was McDowell! At the end of the first hour Keith stood up in the middle
of the floor, and with his arms resting on the table and his shoulders
sagging Conniston put him through the drill. After that he gave Keith
his worn Service Manual and commanded him to study while he rested.
Keith helped him to his bunk, and for a time after that tried to read
the Service book. But his eyes blurred, and his brain refused to obey.
The agony in the Englishman's low breathing oppressed him with a
physical pain. Keith felt himself choking and rose at last from the
table and went out into the gray, ghostly twilight of the night.

His lungs drank in the ice-tanged air. But it was not cold.
Kwaske-hoo--the change--had come. The air was filled with the tumult of
the last fight of winter against the invasion of spring, and the forces
of winter were crumbling. The earth under Keith's feet trembled in the
mighty throes of their dissolution. He could hear more clearly the roar
and snarl and rending thunder of the great fields of ice as they swept
down with the arctic current into Hudson's Bay. Over him hovered a
strange night. It was not black but a weird and wraith-like gray, and
out of this sepulchral chaos came strange sounds and the moaning of a
wind high up. A little while longer, Keith thought, and the thing would
have driven him mad. Even now he fancied he heard the screaming and
wailing of voices far up under the hidden stars. More than once in the
past months he had listened to the sobbing of little children, the
agony of weeping women, and the taunting of wind voices that were
either tormenting or crying out in a ghoulish triumph; and more than
once in those months he had seen Eskimos--born in that hell but driven
mad in the torture of its long night--rend the clothes from their
bodies and plunge naked out into the pitiless gloom and cold to die.
Conniston would never know how near the final breakdown his brain had
been in that hour when he made him a prisoner. And Keith had not told
him. The man-hunter had saved him from going mad. But Keith had kept
that secret to himself.

Even now he shrank down as a blast of wind shot out of the chaos above
and smote the cabin with a shriek that had in it a peculiarly
penetrating note. And then he squared his shoulders and laughed, and
the yapping of the foxes no longer filled him with a shuddering
torment. Beyond them he was seeing home. God's country! Green forests
and waters spattered with golden sun--things he had almost forgotten;
once more the faces of women who were white. And with those faces he
heard the voice of his people and the song of birds and felt under his
feet the velvety touch of earth that was bathed in the aroma of
flowers. Yes, he had almost forgotten those things. Yesterday they had
been with him only as moldering skeletons--phantasmal
dream-things--because he was going mad, but now they were real, they
were just off there to the south, and he was going to them. He
stretched up his arms, and a cry rose out of his throat. It was of
triumph, of final exaltation. Three years of THAT--and he had lived
through it! Three years of dodging from burrow to burrow, just as
Conniston had said, like a hunted fox; three years of starvation, of
freezing, of loneliness so great that his soul had broken--and now he
was going home!

He turned again to the cabin, and when he entered the pale face of the
dying Englishman greeted him from the dim glow of the yellow light at
the table. And Conniston was smiling in a quizzical, distressed sort of
way, with a hand at his chest. His open watch on the table pointed to
the hour of midnight when the lesson went on.

Still later he heated the muzzle of his revolver in the flame of the
seal-oil.

"It will hurt, old chap--putting this scar over your eye. But it's got
to be done. I say, won't it be a ripping joke on McDowell?" Softly he
repeated it, smiling into Keith's eyes. "A ripping joke--on McDowell!"




III


Dawn--the dusk of another night--and Keith raised his haggard face from
Conniston's bedside with a woman's sob on his lips. The Englishman had
died as he knew that he would die, game to the last threadbare breath
that came out of his body. For with this last breath he whispered the
words which he had repeated a dozen times before, "Remember, old chap,
you win or lose the moment McDowell first sets his eyes on you!" And
then, with a strange kind of sob in his chest, he was gone, and Keith's
eyes were blinded by the miracle of a hot flood of tears, and there
rose in him a mighty pride in the name of Derwent Conniston.

It was his name now. John Keith was dead. It was Derwent Conniston who
was living. And as he looked down into the cold, still face of the
heroic Englishman, the thing did not seem so strange to him after all.
It would not be difficult to bear Conniston's name; the difficulty
would be in living up to the Conniston code.

That night the rumble of the ice fields was clearer because there was
no wind to deaden their tumult. The sky was cloudless, and the stars
were like glaring, yellow eyes peering through holes in a vast,
overhanging curtain of jet black. Keith, out to fill his lungs with
air, looked up at the phenomenon of the polar night and shuddered. The
stars were like living things, and they were looking at him. Under
their sinister glow the foxes were holding high carnival. It seemed to
Keith that they had drawn a closer circle about the cabin and that
there was a different note in their yapping now, a note that was more
persistent, more horrible. Conniston had foreseen that closing-in of
the little white beasts of the night, and Keith, reentering the cabin,
set about the fulfillment of his promise. Ghostly dawn found his task
completed.

Half an hour later he stood in the edge of the scrub timber that rimmed
in the arctic plain, and looked for the last time upon the little cabin
under the floor of which the Englishman was buried. It stood there
splendidly unafraid in its terrible loneliness, a proud monument to a
dead man's courage and a dead man's soul. Within its four walls it
treasured a thing which gave to it at last a reason for being, a reason
for fighting against dissolution as long as one log could hold upon
another. Conniston's spirit had become a living part of it, and the
foxes might yap everlastingly, and the winds howl, and winter follow
winter, and long night follow long night--and it would stand there in
its pride fighting to the last, a memorial to Derwent Conniston, the
Englishman.

Looking back at it, Keith bared his head in the raw dawn. "God bless
you, Conniston," he whispered, and turned slowly away and into the
south.

Ahead of him was eight hundred miles of wilderness--eight hundred miles
between him and the little town on the Saskatchewan where McDowell
commanded Division of the Royal Mounted. The thought of distance did
not appall him. Four years at the top of the earth had accustomed him
to the illimitable and had inured him to the lack of things. That
winter Conniston had followed him with the tenacity of a ferret for a
thousand miles along the rim of the Arctic, and it had been a miracle
that he had not killed the Englishman. A score of times he might have
ended the exciting chase without staining his own hands. His Eskimo
friends would have performed the deed at a word. But he had let the
Englishman live, and Conniston, dead, was sending him back home. Eight
hundred miles was but the step between.

He had no dogs or sledge. His own team had given up the ghost long ago,
and a treacherous Kogmollock from the Roes Welcome had stolen the
Englishman's outfit in the last lap of their race down from Fullerton's
Point. What he carried was Conniston's, with the exception of his rifle
and his own parka and hood. He even wore Conniston's watch. His pack
was light. The chief articles it contained were a little flour, a
three-pound tent, a sleeping-bag, and certain articles of
identification to prove the death of John Keith, the outlaw. Hour after
hour of that first day the zip, zip, zip of his snowshoes beat with
deadly monotony upon his brain. He could not think. Time and again it
seemed to him that something was pulling him back, and always he was
hearing Conniston's voice and seeing Conniston's face in the gray gloom
of the day about him. He passed through the slim finger of scrub timber
that a strange freak of nature had flung across the plain, and once
more was a moving speck in a wide and wind-swept barren. In the
afternoon he made out a dark rim on the southern horizon and knew it
was timber, real timber, the first he had seen since that day, a year
and a half ago, when the last of the Mackenzie River forest had faded
away behind him! It gave him, at last, something tangible to grip. It
was a thing beckoning to him, a sentient, living wall beyond which was
his other world. The eight hundred miles meant less to him than the
space between himself and that growing, black rim on the horizon.

He reached it as the twilight of the day was dissolving into the deeper
dusk of the night, and put up his tent in the shelter of a clump of
gnarled and storm-beaten spruce. Then he gathered wood and built
himself a fire. He did not count the sticks as he had counted them for
eighteen months. He was wasteful, prodigal. He had traveled forty miles
since morning but he felt no exhaustion. He gathered wood until he had
a great pile of it, and the flames of his fire leaped higher and higher
until the spruce needles crackled and hissed over his head. He boiled a
pot of weak tea and made a supper of caribou meat and a bit of bannock.
Then he sat with his back to a tree and stared into the flames.

The fire leaping and crackling before his eyes was like a powerful
medicine. It stirred things that had lain dormant within him. It
consumed the heavy dross of four years of stupefying torture and
brought back to him vividly the happenings of a yesterday that had
dragged itself on like a century. All at once he seemed unburdened of
shackles that had weighted him down to the point of madness. Every
fiber in his body responded to that glorious roar of the fire; a thing
seemed to snap in his head, freeing it of an oppressive bondage, and in
the heart of the flames he saw home, and hope, and life--the things
familiar and precious long ago, which the scourge of the north had
almost beaten dead in his memory. He saw the broad Saskatchewan
shimmering its way through the yellow plains, banked in by the
foothills and the golden mists of morning dawn; he saw his home town
clinging to its shore on one side and with its back against the purple
wilderness on the other; he heard the rhythmic chug, chug, chug of the
old gold dredge and the rattle of its chains as it devoured its tons of
sand for a few grains of treasure; over him there were lacy clouds in a
blue heaven again, he heard the sound of voices, the tread of feet,
laughter--life. His soul reborn, he rose to his feet and stretched his
arms until the muscles snapped. No, they would not know him back
there--now! He laughed softly as he thought of the old John
Keith--"Johnny" they used to call him up and down the few
balsam-scented streets--his father's right-hand man mentally but a
little off feed, as his chum, Reddy McTabb, used to say, when it came
to the matter of muscle and brawn. He could look back on things without
excitement now. Even hatred had burned itself out, and he found himself
wondering if old Judge Kirkstone's house looked the same on the top of
the hill, and if Miriam Kirkstone had come back to live there after
that terrible night when he had returned to avenge his father.

Four years! It was not so very long, though the years had seemed like a
lifetime to him. There would not be many changes. Everything would be
the same--everything--except--the old home. That home he and his father
had planned, and they had overseen the building of it, a chateau of
logs a little distance from the town, with the Saskatchewan sweeping
below it and the forest at its doors. Masterless, it must have seen
changes in those four years. Fumbling in his pocket, his fingers
touched Conniston's watch. He drew it out and let the firelight play on
the open dial. It was ten o'clock. In the back of the premier half of
the case Conniston had at some time or another pasted a picture. It
must have been a long time ago, for the face was faded and indistinct.
The eyes alone were undimmed, and in the flash of the fire they took on
a living glow as they looked at Keith. It was the face of a young
girl--a schoolgirl, Keith thought, of ten or twelve. Yet the eyes
seemed older; they seemed pleading with someone, speaking a message
that had come spontaneously out of the soul of the child. Keith closed
the watch. Its tick, tick, tick rose louder to his ears. He dropped it
in his pocket. He could still hear it.

A pitch-filled spruce knot exploded with the startling vividness of a
star bomb, and with it came a dull sort of mental shock to Keith. He
was sure that for an instant he had seen Conniston's face and that the
Englishman's eyes were looking at him as the eyes had looked at him out
of the face in the watch. The deception was so real that it sent him
back a step, staring, and then, his eyes striving to catch the illusion
again, there fell upon him a realization of the tremendous strain he
had been under for many hours. It had been days since he had slept
soundly. Yet he was not sleepy now; he scarcely felt fatigue. The
instinct of self-preservation made him arrange his sleeping-bag on a
carpet of spruce boughs in the tent and go to bed.

Even then, for a long time, he lay in the grip of a harrowing
wakefulness. He closed his eyes, but it was impossible for him to hold
them closed. The sounds of the night came to him with painful
distinctness--the crackling of the fire, the serpent-like hiss of the
flaming pitch, the whispering of the tree tops, and the steady tick,
tick, tick of Conniston's watch. And out on the barren, through the rim
of sheltering trees, the wind was beginning to moan its everlasting
whimper and sob of loneliness. In spite of his clenched hands and his
fighting determination to hold it off, Keith fancied that he heard
again--riding strangely in that wind--the sound of Conniston's voice.
And suddenly he asked himself: What did it mean? What was it that
Conniston had forgotten? What was it that Conniston had been trying to
tell him all that day, when he had felt the presence of him in the
gloom of the Barrens? Was it that Conniston wanted him to come back?

He tried to rid himself of the depressing insistence of that thought.
And yet he was certain that in the last half-hour before death entered
the cabin the Englishman had wanted to tell him something and had
crucified the desire. There was the triumph of an iron courage in those
last words, "Remember, old chap, you win or lose the moment McDowell
first sets his eyes on you!"--but in the next instant, as death sent
home its thrust, Keith had caught a glimpse of Conniston's naked soul,
and in that final moment when speech was gone forever, he knew that
Conniston was fighting to make his lips utter words which he had left
unspoken until too late. And Keith, listening to the moaning of the
wind and the crackling of the fire, found himself repeating over and
over again, "What was it he wanted to say?"

In a lull in the wind Conniston's watch seemed to beat like a heart in
its case, and swiftly its tick, tick, ticked to his ears an answer,
"Come back, come back, come back!"

With a cry at his own pitiable weakness, Keith thrust the thing far
under his sleeping-bag, and there its sound was smothered. At last
sleep overcame him like a restless anesthesia.

With the break of another day he came out of his tent and stirred the
fire. There were still bits of burning ember, and these he fanned into
life and added to their flame fresh fuel. He could not easily forget
last night's torture, but its significance was gone. He laughed at his
own folly and wondered what Conniston himself would have thought of his
nervousness. For the first time in years he thought of the old days
down at college where, among other things, he had made a mark for
himself in psychology. He had considered himself an expert in the
discussion and understanding of phenomena of the mind. Afterward he had
lived up to the mark and had profited by his beliefs, and the fact that
a simple relaxation of his mental machinery had so disturbed him last
night amused him now. The solution was easy. It was his mind struggling
to equilibrium after four years of brain-fag. And he felt better. His
brain was clearer. He listened to the watch and found its ticking
natural. He braced himself to another effort and whistled as he
prepared his breakfast.

After that he packed his dunnage and continued south. He wondered if
Conniston ever knew his Manual as he learned it now. At the end of the
sixth day he could repeat it from cover to cover. Every hour he made it
a practice to stop short and salute the trees about him. McDowell would
not catch him there.

"I am Derwent Conniston," he kept telling himself. "John Keith is
dead--dead. I buried him back there under the cabin, the cabin built by
Sergeant Trossy and his patrol in nineteen hundred and eight. My name
is Conniston--Derwent Conniston."

In his years of aloneness he had grown into the habit of talking to
himself--or with himself--to keep up his courage and sanity. "Keith,
old boy, we've got to fight it out," he would say. Now it was,
"Conniston, old chap, we'll win or die." After the third day, he never
spoke of John Keith except as a man who was dead. And over the dead
John Keith he spread Conniston's mantle. "John Keith died game, sir,"
he said to McDowell, who was a tree. "He was the finest chap I ever
knew."

On this sixth day came the miracle. For the first time in many months
John Keith saw the sun. He had seen the murky glow of it before this,
fighting to break through the pall of fog and haze that hung over the
Barrens, but this sixth day it was the sun, the real sun, bursting in
all its glory for a short space over the northern world. Each day after
this the sun was nearer and warmer, as the arctic vapor clouds and
frost smoke were left farther behind, and not until he had passed
beyond the ice fogs entirely did Keith swing westward. He did not
hurry, for now that he was out of his prison, he wanted time in which
to feel the first exhilarating thrill of his freedom. And more than all
else he knew that he must measure and test himself for the tremendous
fight ahead of him.

Now that the sun and the blue sky had cleared his brain, he saw the
hundred pit-falls in his way, the hundred little slips that might be
made, the hundred traps waiting for any chance blunder on his part.
Deliberately he was on his way to the hangman. Down there--every day of
his life--he would rub elbows with him as he passed his fellow men in
the street. He would never completely feel himself out of the presence
of death. Day and night he must watch himself and guard himself, his
tongue, his feet, his thoughts, never knowing in what hour the eyes of
the law would pierce the veneer of his disguise and deliver his life as
the forfeit. There were times when the contemplation of these things
appalled him, and his mind turned to other channels of escape. And
then--always--he heard Conniston's cool, fighting voice, and the red
blood fired up in his veins, and he faced home.

He was Derwent Conniston. And never for an hour could he put out of his
mind the one great mystifying question in this adventure of life and
death, who was Derwent Conniston? Shred by shred he pieced together
what little he knew, and always he arrived at the same futile end. An
Englishman, dead to his family if he had one, an outcast or an
expatriate--and the finest, bravest gentleman he had ever known. It was
the WHYFORE of these things that stirred within him an emotion which he
had never experienced before. The Englishman had grimly and
determinedly taken his secret to the grave with him. To him, John
Keith--who was now Derwent Conniston--he had left an heritage of deep
mystery and the mission, if he so chose, of discovering who he was,
whence he had come--and why. Often he looked at the young girl's
picture in the watch, and always he saw in her eyes something which
made him think of Conniston as he lay in the last hour of his life.
Undoubtedly the girl had grown into a woman now.

Days grew into weeks, and under Keith's feet the wet, sweet-smelling
earth rose up through the last of the slush snow. Three hundred miles
below the Barrens, he was in the Reindeer Lake country early in May.
For a week he rested at a trapper's cabin on the Burntwood, and after
that set out for Cumberland House. Ten days later he arrived at the
post, and in the sunlit glow of the second evening afterward he built
his camp-fire on the shore of the yellow Saskatchewan.

The mighty river, beloved from the days of his boyhood, sang to him
again, that night, the wonderful things that time and grief had dimmed
in his heart. The moon rose over it, a warm wind drifted out of the
south, and Keith, smoking his pipe, sat for a long time listening to
the soft murmur of it as it rolled past at his feet. For him it had
always been more than the river. He had grown up with it, and it had
become a part of him; it had mothered his earliest dreams and
ambitions; on it he had sought his first adventures; it had been his
chum, his friend, and his comrade, and the fancy struck him that in the
murmuring voice of it tonight there was a gladness, a welcome, an
exultation in his return. He looked out on its silvery bars shimmering
in the moonlight, and a flood of memories swept upon him. Thirty years
was not so long ago that he could not remember the beautiful mother who
had told him stories as the sun went down and bedtime drew near. And
vividly there stood out the wonderful tales of Kistachiwun, the river;
how it was born away over in the mystery of the western mountains, away
from the eyes and feet of men; how it came down from the mountains into
the hills, and through the hills into the plains, broadening and
deepening and growing mightier with every mile, until at last it swept
past their door, bearing with it the golden grains of sand that made
men rich. His father had pointed out the deep-beaten trails of buffalo
to him and had told him stories of the Indians and of the land before
white men came, so that between father and mother the river became his
book of fables, his wonderland, the never-ending source of his
treasured tales of childhood. And tonight the river was the one thing
left to him. It was the one friend he could claim again, the one
comrade he could open his arms to without fear of betrayal. And with
the grief for things that once had lived and were now dead, there came
over him a strange sort of happiness, the spirit of the great river
itself giving him consolation.

Stretching out his arms, he cried: "My old river--it's me--Johnny
Keith! I've come back!"

And the river, whispering, seemed to answer him: "It's Johnny Keith!
And he's come back! He's come back!"




IV


For a week John Keith followed up the shores of the Saskatchewan. It
was a hundred and forty miles from the Hudson's Bay Company's post of
Cumberland House to Prince Albert as the crow would fly, but Keith did
not travel a homing line. Only now and then did he take advantage of a
portage trail. Clinging to the river, his journey was lengthened by
some sixty miles. Now that the hour for which Conniston had prepared
him was so close at hand, he felt the need of this mighty, tongueless
friend that had played such an intimate part in his life. It gave to
him both courage and confidence, and in its company he could think more
clearly. Nights he camped on its golden-yellow bars with the open stars
over his head when he slept; his ears drank in the familiar sounds of
long ago, for which he had yearned to the point of madness in his
exile--the soft cries of the birds that hunted and mated in the glow of
the moon, the friendly twit, twit, twit of the low-flying sand-pipers,
the hoot of the owls, and the splash and sleepy voice of wildfowl
already on their way up from the south. Out of that south, where in
places the plains swept the forest back almost to the river's edge, he
heard now and then the doglike barking of his little yellow friends of
many an exciting horseback chase, the coyotes, and on the wilderness
side, deep in the forest, the sinister howling of wolves. He was
traveling, literally, the narrow pathway between two worlds. The river
was that pathway. On the one hand, not so very far away, were the
rolling prairies, green fields of grain, settlements and towns and the
homes of men; on the other the wilderness lay to the water's edge with
its doors still open to him. The seventh day a new sound came to his
ears at dawn. It was the whistle of a train at Prince Albert.

There was no change in that whistle, and every nerve-string in his body
responded to it with crying thrill. It was the first voice to greet his
home-coming, and the sound of it rolled the yesterdays back upon him in
a deluge. He knew where he was now; he recalled exactly what he would
find at the next turn in the river. A few minutes later he heard the
wheezy chug, chug, chug of the old gold dredge at McCoffin's Bend. It
would be the Betty M., of course, with old Andy Duggan at the windlass,
his black pipe in mouth, still scooping up the shifting sands as he had
scooped them up for more than twenty years. He could see Andy sitting
at his post, clouded in a halo of tobacco smoke, a red-bearded,
shaggy-headed giant of a man whom the town affectionately called the
River Pirate. All his life Andy had spent in digging gold out of the
mountains or the river, and like grim death he had hung to the bars
above and below McCoffin's Bend. Keith smiled as he remembered old
Andy's passion for bacon. One could always find the perfume of bacon
about the Betty M., and when Duggan went to town, there were those who
swore they could smell it in his whiskers.

Keith left the river trail now for the old logging road. In spite of
his long fight to steel himself for what Conniston had called the
"psychological moment," he felt himself in the grip of an uncomfortable
mental excitement. At last he was face to face with the great gamble.
In a few hours he would play his one card. If he won, there was life
ahead of him again, if he lost--death. The old question which he had
struggled to down surged upon him. Was it worth the chance? Was it in
an hour of madness that he and Conniston had pledged themselves to this
amazing adventure? The forest was still with him. He could turn back.
The game had not yet gone so far that he could not withdraw his
hand--and for a space a powerful impulse moved him. And then, coming
suddenly to the edge of the clearing at McCoffin's Bend, he saw the
dredge close inshore, and striding up from the beach Andy Duggan
himself! In another moment Keith had stepped forth and was holding up a
hand in greeting.

He felt his heart thumping in an unfamiliar way as Duggan came on. Was
it conceivable that the riverman would not recognize him? He forgot his
beard, forgot the great change that four years had wrought in him. He
remembered only that Duggan had been his friend, that a hundred times
they had sat together in the quiet glow of long evenings, telling tales
of the great river they both loved. And always Duggan's stories had
been of that mystic paradise hidden away in the western mountains--the
river's end, the paradise of golden lure, where the Saskatchewan was
born amid towering peaks, and where Duggan--a long time ago--had
quested for the treasure which he knew was hidden somewhere there. Four
years had not changed Duggan. If anything his beard was redder and
thicker and his hair shaggier than when Keith had last seen him. And
then, following him from the Betsy M., Keith caught the everlasting
scent of bacon. He devoured it in deep breaths. His soul cried out for
it. Once he had grown tired of Duggan's bacon, but now he felt that he
could go on eating it forever. As Duggan advanced, he was moved by a
tremendous desire to stretch out his hand and say: "I'm John Keith.
Don't you know me, Duggan?" Instead, he choked back his desire and
said, "Fine morning!"

Duggan nodded uncertainly. He was evidently puzzled at not being able
to place his man. "It's always fine on the river, rain 'r shine.
Anybody who says it ain't is a God A'mighty liar!"

He was still the old Duggan, ready to fight for his river at the drop
of a hat! Keith wanted to hug him. He shifted his pack and said:

"I've slept with it for a week--just to have it for company--on the way
down from Cumberland House. Seems good to get back!" He took off his
hat and met the riverman's eyes squarely. "Do you happen to know if
McDowell is at barracks?" he asked.

"He is," said Duggan.

That was all. He was looking at Keith with a curious directness. Keith
held his breath. He would have given a good deal to have seen behind
Duggan's beard. There was a hard note in the riverman's voice, too. It
puzzled him. And there was a flash of sullen fire in his eyes at the
mention of McDowell's name. "The Inspector's there--sittin' tight," he
added, and to Keith's amazement brushed past him without another word
and disappeared into the bush.

This, at least, was not like the good-humored Duggan of four years ago.
Keith replaced his hat and went on. At the farther side of the clearing
he turned and looked back. Duggan stood in the open roadway, his hands
thrust deep in his pockets, staring after him. Keith waved his hand,
but Duggan did not respond. He stood like a sphinx, his big red beard
glowing in the early sun, and watched Keith until he was gone.

To Keith this first experiment in the matter of testing an identity was
a disappointment. It was not only disappointing but filled him with
apprehension. It was true that Duggan had not recognized him as John
Keith, BUT NEITHER HAD HE RECOGNIZED HIM AS DERWENT CONNISTON! And
Duggan was not a man to forget in three or four years--or half a
lifetime, for that matter. He saw himself facing a new and unexpected
situation. What if McDowell, like Duggan, saw in him nothing more than
a stranger? The Englishman's last words pounded in his head again like
little fists beating home a truth, "You win or lose the moment McDowell
first sets his eyes on you." They pressed upon him now with a deadly
significance. For the first time he understood all that Conniston had
meant. His danger was not alone in the possibility of being recognized
as John Keith; it lay also in the hazard of NOT being recognized as
Derwent Conniston.

If the thought had come to him to turn back, if the voice of fear and a
premonition of impending evil had urged him to seek freedom in another
direction, their whispered cautions were futile in the thrill of the
greater excitement that possessed him now. That there was a third hand
playing in this game of chance in which Conniston had already lost his
life, and in which he was now staking his own, was something which gave
to Keith a new and entirely unlooked-for desire to see the end of the
adventure. The mental vision of his own certain fate, should he lose,
dissolved into a nebulous presence that no longer oppressed nor
appalled him. Physical instinct to fight against odds, the inspiration
that presages the uncertainty of battle, fired his blood with an
exhilarating eagerness. He was anxious to stand face to face with
McDowell. Not until then would the real fight begin. For the first time
the fact seized upon him that the Englishman was wrong--he would NOT
win or lose in the first moment of the Inspector's scrutiny. In that
moment he could lose--McDowell's cleverly trained eyes might detect the
fraud; but to win, if the game was not lost at the first shot, meant an
exciting struggle. Today might be his Armageddon, but it could not
possess the hour of his final triumph.

He felt himself now like a warrior held in leash within sound of the
enemy's guns and the smell of his powder. He held his old world to be
his enemy, for civilization meant people, and the people were the
law--and the law wanted his life. Never had he possessed a deeper
hatred for the old code of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth
than in this hour when he saw up the valley a gray mist of smoke rising
over the roofs of his home town. He had never conceded within himself
that he was a criminal. He believed that in killing Kirkstone he had
killed a serpent who had deserved to die, and a hundred times he had
told himself that the job would have been much more satisfactory from
the view-point of human sanitation if he had sent the son in the
father's footsteps. He had rid the people of a man not fit to live--and
the people wanted to kill him for it. Therefore the men and women in
that town he had once loved, and still loved, were his enemies, and to
find friends among them again he was compelled to perpetrate a clever
fraud.

He remembered an unboarded path from this side of the town, which
entered an inconspicuous little street at the end of which was a barber
shop. It was the barber shop which he must reach first He was glad that
it was early in the day when he came to the street an hour later, for
he would meet few people. The street had changed considerably. Long,
open spaces had filled in with houses, and he wondered if the
anticipated boom of four years ago had come. He smiled grimly as the
humor of the situation struck him. His father and he had staked their
future in accumulating a lot of "outside" property. If the boom had
materialized, that property was "inside" now--and worth a great deal.
Before he reached the barber shop he realized that the dream of the
Prince Albertites had come true. Prosperity had advanced upon them in
mighty leaps. The population of the place had trebled. He was a rich
man! And also, it occurred to him, he was a dead one--or would be when
he reported officially to McDowell. What a merry scrap there would be
among the heirs of John Keith, deceased!

The old shop still clung to its corner, which was valuable as "business
footage" now. But it possessed a new barber. He was alone. Keith gave
his instructions in definite detail and showed him Conniston's
photograph in his identification book. The beard and mustache must be
just so, very smart, decidedly English, and of military neatness, his
hair cut not too short and brushed smoothly back. When the operation
was over, he congratulated the barber and himself. Bronzed to the color
of an Indian by wind and smoke, straight as an arrow, his muscles
swelling with the brute strength of the wilderness, he smiled at
himself in the mirror when he compared the old John Keith with this new
Derwent Conniston! Before he went out he tightened his belt a notch.
Then he headed straight for the barracks of His Majesty's Royal
Northwest Mounted Police.

His way took him up the main street, past the rows of shops that had
been there four years ago, past the Saskatchewan Hotel and the little
Board of Trade building which, like the old barber shop, still hung to
its original perch at the edge of the high bank which ran precipitously
down to the river. And there, as sure as fate, was Percival Clary, the
little English Secretary! But what a different Percy!

He had broadened out and straightened up. He had grown a mustache,
which was immaculately waxed. His trousers were immaculately creased,
his shoes were shining, and he stood before the door of his now
important office resting lightly on a cane. Keith grinned as he
witnessed how prosperity had bolstered up Percival along with the town.
His eyes quested for familiar faces as he went along. Here and there he
saw one, but for the most part he encountered strangers, lively looking
men who were hustling as if they had a mission in hand. Glaring real
estate signs greeted him from every place of prominence, and
automobiles began to hum up and down the main street that stretched
along the river--twenty where there had been one not so long ago.

Keith found himself fighting to keep his eyes straight ahead when he
met a girl or a woman. Never had he believed fully and utterly in the
angelhood of the feminine until now. He passed perhaps a dozen on the
way to barracks, and he was overwhelmed with the desire to stop and
feast his eyes upon each one of them. He had never been a lover of
women; he admired them, he believed them to be the better part of man,
he had worshiped his mother, but his heart had been neither glorified
nor broken by a passion for the opposite sex. Now, to the bottom of his
soul, he worshiped that dozen! Some of them were homely, some of them
were plain, two or three of them were pretty, but to Keith their
present physical qualifications made no difference. They were white
women, and they were glorious, every one of them! The plainest of them
was lovely. He wanted to throw up his hat and shout in sheer joy. Four
years--and now he was back in angel land! For a space he forgot
McDowell.

His head was in a whirl when he came to barracks. Life was good, after
all. It was worth fighting for, and he was bound fight. He went
straight to McDowell's office. A moment after his knock on the door the
Inspector's secretary appeared.

"The Inspector is busy, sir," he said in response to Keith's inquiry.
"I'll tell him--"

"That I am here on a very important matter," advised Keith. "He will
admit me when you tell him that I bring information regarding a certain
John Keith."

The secretary disappeared through an inner door. It seemed not more
than ten seconds before he was back. "The Inspector will see you, sir."

Keith drew a deep breath to quiet the violent beating of his heart. In
spite of all his courage he felt upon him the clutch of a cold and
foreboding hand, a hand that seemed struggling to drag him back. And
again he heard Conniston's dying voice whispering to him, "REMEMBER,
OLD CHAP, YOU WIN OR LOSE THE MOMENT MCDOWELL FIRST SETS HIS EYES ON
YOU!"

Was Conniston right?

Win or lose, he would play the game as the Englishman would have played
it. Squaring his shoulders he entered to face McDowell, the cleverest
man-hunter in the Northwest.




V


Keith's first vision, as he entered the office of the Inspector of
Police, was not of McDowell, but of a girl. She sat directly facing him
as he advanced through the door, the light from a window throwing into
strong relief her face and hair. The effect was unusual. She was
strikingly handsome. The sun, giving to the room a soft radiance, lit
up her hair with shimmering gold; her eyes, Keith saw, were a clear and
wonderful gray--and they stared at him as he entered, while the poise
of her body and the tenseness of her face gave evidence of sudden and
unusual emotion. These things Keith observed in a flash; then he turned
toward McDowell.

The Inspector sat behind a table covered with maps and papers, and
instantly Keith was conscious of the penetrating inquisition of his
gaze. He felt, for an instant, the disquieting tremor of the criminal.
Then he met McDowell's eyes squarely. They were, as Conniston had
warned him, eyes that could see through boiler-plate. Of an indefinable
color and deep set behind shaggy, gray eyebrows, they pierced him
through at the first glance. Keith took in the carefully waxed gray
mustaches, the close-cropped gray hair, the rigidly set muscles of the
man's face, and saluted.

He felt creeping over him a slow chill. There was no greeting in that
iron-like countenance, for full a quarter-minute no sign of
recognition. And then, as the sun had played in the girl's hair, a new
emotion passed over McDowell's face, and Keith saw for the first time
the man whom Derwent Conniston had known as a friend as well as a
superior. He rose from his chair, and leaning over the table said in a
voice in which were mingled both amazement and pleasure:

"We were just talking about the devil--and here you are, sir!
Conniston, how are you?"

For a few moments Keith did not see. HE HAD WON! The blood pounded
through his heart so violently that it confused his vision and his
senses. He felt the grip of McDowell's hand; he heard his voice; a
vision swam before his eyes--and it was the vision of Derwent
Conniston's triumphant face. He was standing erect, his head was up, he
was meeting McDowell shoulder to shoulder, even smiling, but in that
swift surge of exultation he did not know. McDowell, still gripping his
hand and with his other hand on his arm, was wheeling him about, and he
found the girl on her feet, staring at him as if he had newly risen
from the dead.

McDowell's military voice was snapping vibrantly, "Conniston, meet Miss
Miriam Kirkstone, daughter of Judge Kirkstone!"

He bowed and held for a moment in his own the hand of the girl whose
father he had killed. It was lifeless and cold. Her lips moved, merely
speaking his name. His own were mute. McDowell was saying something
about the glory of the service and the sovereignty of the law. And
then, breaking in like the beat of a drum on the introduction, his
voice demanded, "Conniston--DID YOU GET YOUR MAN?"

The question brought Keith to his senses. He inclined his head slightly
and said, "I beg to report that John Keith is dead, sir."

He saw Miriam Kirkstone give a visible start, as if his words had
carried a stab. She was apparently making a strong effort to hide her
agitation as she turned swiftly away from him, speaking to McDowell.

"You have been very kind, Inspector McDowell. I hope very soon to have
the pleasure of talking with Mr. Conniston--about--John Keith."

She left them, nodding slightly to Keith.

When she was gone, a puzzled look filled the Inspector's eyes. "She has
been like that for the last six months," he explained. "Tremendously
interested in this man Keith and his fate. I don't believe that I have
watched for your return more anxiously than she has, Conniston. And the
curious part of it is she seemed to have no interest in the matter at
all until six months ago. Sometimes I am afraid that brooding over her
father's death has unsettled her a little. A mighty pretty girl,
Conniston. A mighty pretty girl, indeed! And her brother is a skunk.
Pst! You haven't forgotten him?"

He drew a chair up close to his own and motioned Keith to be seated.
"You're changed, Conniston!"

The words came out of him like a shot. So unexpected were they that
Keith felt the effect of them in every nerve of his body. He sensed
instantly what McDowell meant. He was NOT like the Englishman; he
lacked his mannerisms, his cool and superior suavity, the inimitable
quality of his nerve and sportsmanship. Even as he met the disquieting
directness of the Inspector's eyes, he could see Conniston sitting in
his place, rolling his mustache between his forefinger and thumb, and
smiling as though he had gone into the north but yesterday and had
returned today. That was what McDowell was missing in him, the soul of
Conniston himself--Conniston, the ne plus ultra of presence and amiable
condescension, the man who could look the Inspector or the High
Commissioner himself between the eyes, and, serenely indifferent to
Service regulations, say, "Fine morning, old top!" Keith was not
without his own sense of humor. How the Englishman's ghost must be
raging if it was in the room at the present moment! He grinned and
shrugged his shoulders.

"Were you ever up there--through the Long Night--alone?" he asked.
"Ever been through six months of living torture with the stars leering
at you and the foxes barking at you all the time, fighting to keep
yourself from going mad? I went through that twice to get John Keith,
and I guess you're right. I'm changed. I don't think I'll ever be the
same again. Something--has gone. I can't tell what it is, but I feel
it. I guess only half of me pulled through. It killed John Keith.
Rotten, isn't it?"

He felt that he had made a lucky stroke. McDowell pulled out a drawer
from under the table and thrust a box of fat cigars under his nose.

"Light up, Derry--light up and tell us what happened. Bless my soul,
you're not half dead! A week in the old town will straighten you out."

He struck a match and held it to the tip of Keith's cigar.

For an hour thereafter Keith told the story of the man-hunt. It was his
Iliad. He could feel the presence of Conniston as words fell from his
lips; he forgot the presence of the stern-faced man who was watching
him and listening to him; he could see once more only the long months
and years of that epic drama of one against one, of pursuit and flight,
of hunger and cold, of the Long Nights filled with the desolation of
madness and despair. He triumphed over himself, and it was Conniston
who spoke from within him. It was the Englishman who told how terribly
John Keith had been punished, and when he came to the final days in the
lonely little cabin in the edge of the Barrens, Keith finished with a
choking in his throat, and the words, "And that was how John Keith
died--a gentleman and a MAN!"

He was thinking of the Englishman, of the calm and fearless smile in
his eyes as he died, of his last words, the last friendly grip of his
hand, and McDowell saw the thing as though he had faced it himself. He
brushed a hand over his face as if to wipe away a film. For some
moments after Keith had finished, he stood with his back to the man who
he thought was Conniston, and his mind was swiftly adding twos and twos
and fours and fours as he looked away into the green valley of the
Saskatchewan. He was the iron man when he turned to Keith again, the
law itself, merciless and potent, by some miracle turned into the form
of human flesh.

"After two and a half years of THAT even a murderer must have seemed
like a saint to you, Conniston. You have done your work splendidly. The
whole story shall go to the Department, and if it doesn't bring you a
commission, I'll resign. But we must continue to regret that John Keith
did not live to be hanged."

"He has paid the price," said Keith dully.

"No, he has not paid the price, not in full. He merely died. It could
have been paid only at the end of a rope. His crime was atrociously
brutal, the culmination of a fiend's desire for revenge. We will wipe
off his name. But I can not wipe away the regret. I would sacrifice a
year of my life if he were in this room with you now. It would be worth
it. God, what a thing for the Service--to have brought John Keith back
to justice after four years!"

He was rubbing his hands and smiling at Keith even as he spoke. His
eyes had taken on a filmy glitter. The law! It stood there, without
heart or soul, coveting the life that had escaped it. A feeling of
revulsion swept over Keith.

A knock came at the door.

McDowell's voice gave permission, and the door slowly opened. Cruze,
the young secretary, thrust in his head.

"Shan Tung is waiting, sir," he said.

An invisible hand reached up suddenly and gripped at Keith's throat. He
turned aside to conceal what his face might have betrayed. Shan Tung!
He knew what it was now that had pulled him back, he knew why
Conniston's troubled face had traveled with him over the Barrens, and
there surged over him with a sickening foreboding, a realization of
what it was that Conniston had remembered and wanted to tell him--when
it was too late. THEY HAD FORGOTTEN SHAN TUNG, THE CHINAMAN!




VI


In the hall beyond the secretary's room Shan Tung waited. As McDowell
was the iron and steel embodiment of the law, so Shan Tung was the
flesh and blood spirit of the mysticism and immutability of his race.
His face was the face of an image made of an unemotional living tissue
in place of wood or stone, dispassionate, tolerant, patient. What
passed in the brain behind his yellow-tinged eyes only Shan Tung knew.
It was his secret. And McDowell had ceased to analyze or attempt to
understand him. The law, baffled in its curiosity, had come to accept
him as a weird and wonderful mechanism--a thing more than a
man--possessed of an unholy power. This power was the oriental's
marvelous ability to remember faces. Once Shan Tung looked at a face,
it was photographed in his memory for years. Time and change could not
make him forget--and the law made use of him.

Briefly McDowell had classified him at Headquarters. "Either an exiled
prime minister of China or the devil in a yellow skin," he had written
to the Commissioner. "Correct age unknown and past history a mystery.
Dropped into Prince Albert in 1908 wearing diamonds and patent leather
shoes. A stranger then and a stranger now. Proprietor and owner of the
Shan Tung Cafe. Educated, soft-spoken, womanish, but the one man on
earth I'd hate to be in a dark room with, knives drawn. I use him,
mistrust him, watch him, and would fear him under certain conditions.
As far as we can discover, he is harmless and law-abiding. But such a
ferret must surely have played his game somewhere, at some time."

This was the man whom Conniston had forgotten and Keith now dreaded to
meet. For many minutes Shan Tung had stood at a window looking out upon
the sunlit drillground and the broad sweep of green beyond. He was
toying with his slim hands caressingly. Half a smile was on his lips.
No man had ever seen more than that half smile illuminate Shan Tung's
face. His black hair was sleek and carefully trimmed. His dress was
immaculate. His slimness, as McDowell had noted, was the slimness of a
young girl.

When Cruze came to announce that McDowell would see him, Shan Tung was
still visioning the golden-headed figure of Miriam Kirkstone as he had
seen her passing through the sunshine. There was something like a purr
in his breath as he stood interlacing his tapering fingers. The instant
he heard the secretary's footsteps the finger play stopped, the purr
died, the half smile was gone. He turned softly. Cruze did not speak.
He simply made a movement of his head, and Shan Tung's feet fell
noiselessly. Only the slight sound made by the opening and closing of a
door gave evidence of his entrance into the Inspector's room. Shan Tung
and no other could open and close a door like that. Cruze shivered. He
always shivered when Shan Tung passed him, and always he swore that he
could smell something in the air, like a poison left behind.

Keith, facing the window, was waiting. The moment the door was opened,
he felt Shan Tung's presence. Every nerve in his body was keyed to an
uncomfortable tension. The thought that his grip on himself was
weakening, and because of a Chinaman, maddened him. And he must turn.
Not to face Shan Tung now would be but a postponement of the ordeal and
a confession of cowardice. Forcing his hand into Conniston's little
trick of twisting a mustache, he turned slowly, leveling his eyes
squarely to meet Shan Tung's.

To his surprise Shan Tung seemed utterly oblivious of his presence. He
had not, apparently, taken more than a casual glance in his direction.
In a voice which one beyond the door might have mistaken for a woman's,
he was saying to McDowell:

"I have seen the man you sent me to see, Mr. McDowell. It is Larsen. He
has changed much in eight years. He has grown a beard. He has lost an
eye. His hair has whitened. But it is Larsen." The faultlessness of his
speech and the unemotional but perfect inflection of his words made
Keith, like the young secretary, shiver where he stood. In McDowell's
face he saw a flash of exultation.

"He had no suspicion of you, Shan Tung?"

"He did not see me to suspect. He will be there--when--" Slowly he
faced Keith. "--When Mr. Conniston goes to arrest him," he finished.

He inclined his head as he backed noiselessly toward the door. His
yellow eyes did not leave Keith's face. In them Keith fancied that he
caught a sinister gleam. There was the faintest inflection of a new
note in his voice, and his fingers were playing again, but not as when
he had looked out through the window at Miriam Kirkstone. And then--in
a flash, it seemed to Keith--the Chinaman's eyes closed to narrow
slits, and the pupils became points of flame no larger than the
sharpened ends of a pair of pencils. The last that Keith was conscious
of seeing of Shan Tung was the oriental's eyes. They had seemed to drag
his soul half out of his body.

"A queer devil," said McDowell. "After he is gone, I always feel as if
a snake had been in the room. He still hates you, Conniston. Three
years have made no difference. He hates you like poison. I believe he
would kill you, if he had a chance to do it and get away with the
Business. And you--you blooming idiot--simply twiddle your mustache and
laugh at him! I'd feel differently if I were in your boots."

Inwardly Keith was asking himself why it was that Shan Tung had hated
Conniston.

McDowell added nothing to enlighten him. He was gathering up a number
of papers scattered on his desk, smiling with a grim satisfaction.
"It's Larsen all right if Shan Tung says so," he told Keith. And then,
as if he had only thought of the matter, he said, "You're going to
reenlist, aren't you, Conniston?"

"I still owe the Service a month or so before my term expires, don't I?
After that--yes--I believe I shall reenlist."

"Good!" approved the Inspector. "I'll have you a sergeancy within a
month. Meanwhile you're off duty and may do anything you please. You
know Brady, the Company agent? He's up the Mackenzie on a trip, and
here's the key to his shack. I know you'll appreciate getting under a
real roof again, and Brady won't object as long as I collect his thirty
dollars a month rent. Of course Barracks is open to you, but it just
occurred to me you might prefer this place while on furlough.
Everything is there from a bathtub to nutcrackers, and I know a little
Jap in town who is hunting a job as a cook. What do you say?"

"Splendid!" cried Keith. "I'll go up at once, and if you'll hustle the
Jap along, I'll appreciate it. You might tell him to bring up stuff for
dinner," he added.

McDowell gave him a key. Ten minutes later he was out of sight of
barracks and climbing a green slope that led to Brady's bungalow.

In spite of the fact that he had not played his part brilliantly, he
believed that he had scored a triumph. Andy Duggan had not recognized
him, and the riverman had been one of his most intimate friends.
McDowell had accepted him apparently without a suspicion. And Shan
Tung--

It was Shan Tung who weighed heavily upon his mind, even as his nerves
tingled with the thrill of success. He could not get away from the
vision of the Chinaman as he had backed through the Inspector's door,
the flaming needle-points of his eyes piercing him as he went. It was
not hatred he had seen in Shan Tung's face. He was sure of that. It was
no emotion that he could describe. It was as if a pair of mechanical
eyes fixed in the head of an amazingly efficient mechanical monster had
focused themselves on him in those few instants. It made him think of
an X-ray machine. But Shan Tung was human. And he was clever. Given
another skin, one would not have taken him for what he was. The
immaculateness of his speech and manners was more than unusual; it was
positively irritating, something which no Chinaman should rightfully
possess. So argued Keith as he went up to Brady's bungalow.

He tried to throw off the oppression of the thing that was creeping
over him, the growing suspicion that he had not passed safely under the
battery of Shan Tung's eyes. With physical things he endeavored to
thrust his mental uneasiness into the background. He lighted one of the
half-dozen cigars McDowell had dropped into his pocket. It was good to
feel a cigar between his teeth again and taste its flavor. At the crest
of the slope on which Brady's bungalow stood, he stopped and looked
about him. Instinctively his eyes turned first to the west. In that
direction half of the town lay under him, and beyond its edge swept the
timbered slopes, the river, and the green pathways of the plains. His
heart beat a little faster as he looked. Half a mile away was a tiny,
parklike patch of timber, and sheltered there, with the river running
under it, was the old home. The building was hidden, but through a
break in the trees he could see the top of the old red brick chimney
glowing in the sun, as if beckoning a welcome to him over the tree
tops. He forgot Shan Tung; he forgot McDowell; he forgot that he was
John Keith, the murderer, in the overwhelming sea of loneliness that
swept over him. He looked out into the world that had once been his,
and all that he saw was that red brick chimney glowing in the sun, and
the chimney changed until at last it seemed to him like a tombstone
rising over the graves of the dead. He turned to the door of the
bungalow with a thickening in his throat and his eyes filmed by a mist
through which for a few moments it was difficult for him to see.

The bungalow was darkened by drawn curtains when he entered. One after
another he let them up, and the sun poured in. Brady had left his place
in order, and Keith felt about him an atmosphere of cheer that was a
mighty urge to his flagging spirits. Brady was a home man without a
wife. The Company's agent had called his place "The Shack" because it
was built entirely of logs, and a woman could not have made it more
comfortable. Keith stood in the big living-room. At one end was a
strong fireplace in which kindlings and birch were already laid,
waiting the touch of a match. Brady's reading table and his easy chair
were drawn up close; his lounging moccasins were on a footstool; pipes,
tobacco, books and magazines littered the table; and out of this
cheering disorder rose triumphantly the amber shoulder of a half-filled
bottle of Old Rye.

Keith found himself chuckling. His grin met the lifeless stare of a
pair of glass eyes in the huge head of an old bull moose over the
mantel, and after that his gaze rambled over the walls ornamented with
mounted heads, pictures, snowshoes, gun-racks and the things which went
to make up the comradeship and business of Brady's picturesque life.
Keith could look through into the little dining-room, and beyond that
was the kitchen. He made an inventory of both and found that McDowell
was right. There were nutcrackers in Brady's establishment. And he
found the bathroom. It was not much larger than a piano box, but the
tub was man's size, and Keith raised a window and poked his head out to
find that it was connected with a rainwater tank built by a genius,
just high enough to give weight sufficient for a water system and low
enough to gather the rain as it fell from the eaves. He laughed
outright, the sort of laugh that comes out of a man's soul not when he
is amused but when he is pleased. By the time he had investigated the
two bedrooms, he felt a real affection for Brady. He selected the
agent's room for his own. Here, too, were pipes and tobacco and books
and magazines, and a reading lamp on a table close to the bedside. Not
until he had made a closer inspection of the living-room did he
discover that the Shack also had a telephone.

By that time he noted that the sun had gone out. Driving up from the
west was a mass of storm clouds. He unlocked a door from which he could
look up the river, and the wind that was riding softly in advance of
the storm ruffled his hair and cooled his face. In it he caught again
the old fancy--the smells of the vast reaches of unpeopled prairie
beyond the rim of the forest, and the luring chill of the distant
mountain tops. Always storm that came down with the river brought to
him voice from the river's end. It came to him from the great mountains
that were a passion with him; it seemed to thunder to him the old
stories of the mightiest fastnesses of the Rockies and stirred in him
the child-bred yearning to follow up his beloved river until he came at
last to the mystery of its birthplace in the cradle of the western
ranges. And now, as he faced the storm, the grip of that desire held
him like a strong hand.

The sky blackened swiftly, and with the rumbling of far-away thunder he
saw the lightning slitting the dark heaven like bayonets, and the fire
of the electrical charges galloped to him and filled his veins. His
heart all at once cried out words that his lips did not utter. Why
should he not answer the call that had come to him through all the
years? Now was the time--and why should he not go? Why tempt fate in
the hazard of a great adventure where home and friends and even hope
were dead to him, when off there beyond the storm was the place of his
dreams? He threw out his arms. His voice broke at last in a cry of
strange ecstasy. Not everything was gone! Not everything was dead! Over
the graveyard of his past there was sweeping a mighty force that called
him, something that was no longer merely an urge and a demand but a
thing that was irresistible. He would go! Tomorrow--today--tonight--he
would begin making plans!

He watched the deluge as it came on with a roar of wind, a beating,
hissing wall under which the tree tops down in the edge of the plain
bent their heads like a multitude of people in prayer. He saw it
sweeping up the slope in a mass of gray dragoons. It caught him before
he had closed the door, and his face dripped with wet as he forced the
last inch of it against the wind with his shoulder. It was the sort of
storm Keith liked. The thunder was the rumble of a million giant
cartwheels rolling overhead.

Inside the bungalow it was growing dark as though evening had come. He
dropped on his knees before the pile of dry fuel in the fireplace and
struck a match. For a space the blaze smoldered; then the birch fired
up like oil-soaked tinder, and a yellow flame crackled and roared up
the flue. Keith was sensitive in the matter of smoking other people's
pipes, so he drew out his own and filled it with Brady's tobacco. It
was an English mixture, rich and aromatic, and as the fire burned
brighter and the scent of the tobacco filled the room, he dropped into
Brady's big lounging chair and stretched out his legs with a deep
breath of satisfaction. His thoughts wandered to the clash of the
storm. He would have a place like this out there in the mystery of the
trackless mountains, where the Saskatchewan was born. He would build it
like Brady's place, even to the rain-water tank midway between the roof
and the ground. And after a few years no one would remember that a man
named John Keith had ever lived.

Something brought him suddenly to his feet. It was the ringing of the
telephone. After four years the sound was one that roused with an
uncomfortable jump every nerve in his body. Probably it was McDowell
calling up about the Jap or to ask how he liked the place. Probably--it
was that. He repeated the thought aloud as he laid his pipe on the
table. And yet as his hand came in contact with the telephone, he felt
an inclination to draw back. A subtle voice whispered him not to
answer, to leave while the storm was dark, to go back into the
wilderness, to fight his way to the western mountains.

With a jerk he unhooked the receiver and put it to his ear.

It was not McDowell who answered him. It was not Shan Tung. To his
amazement, coming to him through the tumult of the storm, he recognized
the voice of Miriam Kirkstone!




VII


Why should Miriam Kirkstone call him up in an hour when the sky was
livid with the flash of lightning and the earth trembled with the roll
of thunder? This was the question that filled Keith's mind as he
listened to the voice at the other end of the wire. It was pitched to a
high treble as if unconsciously the speaker feared that the storm might
break in upon her words. She was telling him that she had telephoned
McDowell but had been too late to catch him before he left for Brady's
bungalow; she was asking him to pardon her for intruding upon his time
so soon after his return, but she was sure that he would understand
her. She wanted him to come up to see her that evening at eight
o'clock. It was important--to her. Would he come?

Before Keith had taken a moment to consult with himself he had replied
that he would. He heard her "thank you," her "good-by," and hung up the
receiver, stunned. So far as he could remember, he had spoken no more
than seven words. The beautiful young woman up at the Kirkstone mansion
had clearly betrayed her fear of the lightning by winding up her
business with him at the earliest possible moment. Why, then, had she
not waited until the storm was over?

A pounding at the door interrupted his thought. He went to it and
admitted an individual who, in spite of his water-soaked condition, was
smiling all over. It was Wallie, the Jap. He was no larger than a boy
of sixteen, and from eyes, ears, nose, and hair he was dripping
streams, while his coat bulged with packages which he had struggled to
protect, from the torrent through which he had forced his way up the
hill. Keith liked him on the instant. He found himself powerless to
resist the infection of Wallie's grin, and as Wallie hustled into the
kitchen like a wet spaniel, he followed and helped him unload. By the
time the little Jap had disgorged his last package, he had assured
Keith that the rain was nice, that his name was Wallie, that he
expected five dollars a week and could cook "like heaven." Keith
laughed outright, and Wallie was so delighted with the general outlook
that he fairly kicked his heels together. Thereafter for an hour or so
he was left alone in possession of the kitchen, and shortly Keith began
to hear certain sounds and catch occasional odoriferous whiffs which
assured him that Wallie was losing no time in demonstrating his divine
efficiency in the matter of cooking.

Wallie's coming gave him an excuse to call up McDowell. He confessed to
a disquieting desire to hear the inspector's voice again. In the back
of his head was the fear of Shan Tung, and the hope that McDowell might
throw some light on Miriam Kirkstone's unusual request to see her that
night. The storm had settled down into a steady drizzle when he got in
touch with him, and he was relieved to find there was no change in the
friendliness of the voice that came over the telephone. If Shan Tung
had a suspicion, he had kept it to himself.

To Keith's surprise it was McDowell who spoke first of Miss Kirkstone.

"She seemed unusually anxious to get in touch with you," he said. "I am
frankly disturbed over a certain matter, Conniston, and I should like
to talk with you before you go up tonight."

Keith sniffed the air. "Wallie is going to ring the dinner bell within
half an hour. Why not slip on a raincoat and join me up here? I think
it's going to be pretty good."

"I'll come," said McDowell. "Expect me any moment."

Fifteen minutes later Keith was helping him off with his wet slicker.
He had expected McDowell to make some observation on the cheerfulness
of the birch fire and the agreeable aromas that were leaking from
Wallie's kitchen, but the inspector disappointed him. He stood for a
few moments with his back to the fire, thumbing down the tobacco in his
pipe, and he made no effort to conceal the fact that there was
something in his mind more important than dinner and the cheer of a
grate.

His eyes fell on the telephone, and he nodded toward it. "Seemed very
anxious to see you, didn't she, Conniston? I mean Miss Kirkstone."

"Rather."

McDowell seated himself and lighted a match. "Seemed--a
little--nervous--perhaps," he suggested between puffs. "As though
something had happened--or was going to happen. Don't mind my
questioning you, do you, Derry?"

"Not a bit," said Keith. "You see, I thought perhaps you might
explain--"

There was a disquieting gleam in McDowell's eyes. "It was odd that she
should call you up so soon--and in the storm--wasn't it? She expected
to find you at my office. I could fairly hear the lightning hissing
along the wires. She must have been under some unusual impulse."

"Perhaps."

McDowell was silent for a space, looking steadily at Keith, as if
measuring him up to something.

"I don't mind telling you that I am very deeply interested in Miss
Kirkstone," he said. "You didn't see her when the Judge was killed. She
was away at school, and you were on John Keith's trail when she
returned. I have never been much of a woman's man, Conniston, but I
tell you frankly that up until six or eight months ago Miriam was one
of the most beautiful girls I have ever seen. I would give a good deal
to know the exact hour and date when the change in her began. I might
be able to trace some event to that date. It was six months ago that
she began to take an interest in the fate of John Keith. Since then the
change in her has alarmed me, Conniston. I don't understand. She has
betrayed nothing. But I have seen her dying by inches under my eyes.
She is only a pale and drooping flower compared with what she was. I am
positive it is not a sickness--unless it is mental. I have a suspicion.
It is almost too terrible to put into words. You will be going up there
tonight--you will be alone with her, will talk with her, may learn a
great deal if you understand what it is that is eating like a canker in
my mind. Will you help me to discover her secret?" He leaned toward
Keith. He was no longer the man of iron. There was something intensely
human in his face.

"There is no other man on earth I would confide this matter to," he
went on slowly. "It will take--a gentleman--to handle it, someone who
is big enough to forget if my suspicion is untrue, and who will
understand fully what sacrilege means should it prove true. It is
extremely delicate. I hesitate. And yet--I am waiting, Conniston. Is it
necessary to ask you to pledge secrecy in the matter?"

Keith held out a hand. McDowell gripped it tight.

"It is--Shan Tung," he said, a peculiar hiss in his voice. "Shan
Tung--and Miriam Kirkstone! Do you understand, Conniston? Does the
horror of it get hold of you? Can you make yourself believe that it is
possible? Am I mad to allow such a suspicion to creep into my brain?
Shan Tung--Miriam Kirkstone! And she sees herself standing now at the
very edge of the pit of hell, and it is killing her."

Keith felt his blood running cold as he saw in the inspector's face the
thing which he did not put more plainly in word. He was shocked. He
drew his hand from McDowell's grip almost fiercely.

"Impossible!" he cried. "Yes, you are mad. Such a thing would be
inconceivable!"

"And yet I have told myself that it is possible," said McDowell. His
face was returning into its iron-like mask. His two hands gripped the
arms of his chair, and he stared at Keith again as if he were looking
through him at something else, and to that something else he seemed to
speak, slowly, weighing and measuring each word before it passed his
lips. "I am not superstitious. It has always been a law with me to have
conviction forced upon me. I do not believe unusual things until
investigation proves them. I am making an exception in the case of Shan
Tung. I have never regarded him as a man, like you and me, but as a
sort of superphysical human machine possessed of a certain
psychological power that is at times almost deadly. Do you begin to
understand me? I believe that he has exerted the whole force of that
influence upon Miriam Kirkstone--and she has surrendered to it. I
believe--and yet I am not positive."

"And you have watched them for six months?"

"No. The suspicion came less than a month ago. No one that I know has
ever had the opportunity of looking into Shan Tung's private life. The
quarters behind his cafe are a mystery. I suppose they can be entered
from the cafe and also from a little stairway at the rear. One
night--very late--I saw Miriam Kirkstone come down that stairway. Twice
in the last month she has visited Shan Tung at a late hour. Twice that
I know of, you understand. And that is not all--quite."

Keith saw the distended veins in McDowell's clenched hands, and he knew
that he was speaking under a tremendous strain.

"I watched the Kirkstone home--personally. Three times in that same
month Shan Tung visited her there. The third time I entered boldly with
a fraud message for the girl. I remained with her for an hour. In that
time I saw nothing and heard nothing of Shan Tung. He was hiding--or
got out as I came in."

Keith was visioning Miriam Kirkstone as he had seen her in the
inspector's office. He recalled vividly the slim, golden beauty of her,
the wonderful gray of her eyes, and the shimmer of her hair as she
stood in the light of the window--and then he saw Shan Tung,
effeminate, with his sly, creeping hands and his narrowed eyes, and the
thing which McDowell had suggested rose up before him a monstrous
impossibility.

"Why don't you demand an explanation of Miss Kirkstone?" he asked.

"I have, and she denies it all absolutely, except that Shan Tung came
to her house once to see her brother. She says that she was never on
the little stairway back of Shan Tung's place."

"And you do not believe her?"

"Assuredly not. I saw her. To speak the cold truth, Conniston, she is
lying magnificently to cover up something which she does not want any
other person on earth to know."

Keith leaned forward suddenly. "And why is it that John Keith, dead and
buried, should have anything to do with this?" he demanded. "Why did
this 'intense interest' you speak of in John Keith begin at about the
same time your suspicions began to include Shan Tung?"

McDowell shook his head. "It may be that her interest was not so much
in John Keith as in you, Conniston. That is for you to
discover--tonight. It is an interesting situation. It has tragic
possibilities. The instant you substantiate my suspicions we'll deal
directly with Shan Tung. Just now--there's Wallie behind you grinning
like a Cheshire cat. His dinner must be a success."

The diminutive Jap had noiselessly opened the door of the little
dining-room in which the table was set for two.

Keith smiled as he sat down opposite the man who would have sent him to
the executioner had he known the truth. After all, it was but a step
from comedy to tragedy. And just now he was conscious of a bit of
grisly humor in the situation.




VIII


The storm had settled into a steady drizzle when McDowell left the
Shack at two o'clock. Keith watched the iron man, as his tall, gray
figure faded away into the mist down the slope, with a curious
undercurrent of emotion. Before the inspector had come up as his guest
he had, he thought, definitely decided his future action. He would go
west on his furlough, write McDowell that he had decided not to
reenlist, and bury himself in the British Columbia mountains before an
answer could get back to him, leaving the impression that he was going
on to Australia or Japan. He was not so sure of himself now. He found
himself looking ahead to the night, when he would see Miriam Kirkstone,
and he no longer feared Shan Tung as he had feared him a few hours
before. McDowell himself had given him new weapons. He was unofficially
on Shan Tung's trail. McDowell had frankly placed the affair of Miriam
Kirkstone in his hands. That it all had in some mysterious way
something to do with himself--John Keith--urged him on to the adventure.

He waited impatiently for the evening. Wallie, smothered in a great
raincoat, he sent forth on a general foraging expedition and to bring
up some of Conniston's clothes. It was a quarter of eight when he left
for Miriam Kirkstone's home.

Even at that early hour the night lay about him heavy and dark and
saturated with a heavy mist. From the summit of the hill he could no
longer make out the valley of the Saskatchewan. He walked down into a
pit in which the scattered lights of the town burned dully like distant
stars. It was a little after eight when he came to the Kirkstone house.
It was set well back in an iron-fenced area thick with trees and
shrubbery, and he saw that the porch light was burning to show him the
way. Curtains were drawn, but a glow of warm light lay behind them.

He was sure that Miriam Kirkstone must have heard the crunch of his
feet on the gravel walk, for he had scarcely touched the old-fashioned
knocker on the door when the door itself was opened. It was Miriam who
greeted him. Again he held her hand for a moment in his own.

It was not cold, as it had been in McDowell's office. It was almost
feverishly hot, and the pupils of the girl's eyes were big, and dark,
and filled with a luminous fire. Keith might have thought that coming
in out of the dark night he had startled her. But it was not that. She
was repressing something that had preceded him. He thought that he
heard the almost noiseless closing of a door at the end of the long
hall, and his nostrils caught the faint aroma of a strange perfume.
Between him and the light hung a filmy veil of smoke. He knew that it
had come from a cigarette. There was an uneasy note in Miss Kirkstone's
voice as she invited him to hang his coat and hat on an old-fashioned
rack near the door. He took his time, trying to recall where he had
detected that perfume before. He remembered, with a sort of shock. It
was after Shan Tung had left McDowell's office.

She was smiling when he turned, and apologizing again for making her
unusual request that day.

"It was--quite unconventional. But I felt that you would understand,
Mr. Conniston. I guess I didn't stop to think. And I am afraid of
lightning, too. But I wanted to see you. I didn't want to wait until
tomorrow to hear about what happened up there. Is it--so strange?"

Afterward he could not remember just what sort of answer he made. She
turned, and he followed her through the big, square-cut door leading
out of the hall. It was the same door with the great, sliding panel he
had locked on that fateful night, years ago, when he had fought with
her father and brother. In it, for a moment, her slim figure was
profiled in a frame of vivid light. Her mother must have been
beautiful. That was the thought that flashed upon him as the room and
its tragic memory lay before him. Everything came back to him vividly,
and he was astonished at the few changes in it. There was the big chair
with its leather arms, in which the overfatted creature who had been
her father was sitting when he came in. It was the same table, too, and
it seemed to him that the same odds and ends were on the mantel over
the cobblestone fireplace. And there was somebody's picture of the
Madonna still hanging between two windows. The Madonna, like the master
of the house, had been too fat to be beautiful. The son, an ogreish
pattern of his father, had stood with his back to the Madonna, whose
overfat arms had seemed to rest on his shoulders. He remembered that.

The girl was watching him closely when he turned toward her. He had
frankly looked the room over, without concealing his intention. She was
breathing a little unsteadily, and her hair was shimmering gloriously
in the light of an overhead chandelier. She sat down with that light
over her, motioning him to be seated opposite her--across the same
table from which he had snatched the copper weight that had killed
Kirkstone. He had never seen anything quite so steady, quite so
beautiful as her eyes when they looked across at him. He thought of
McDowell's suspicion and of Shan Tung and gripped himself hard. The
same strange perfume hung subtly on the air he was breathing. On a
small silver tray at his elbow lay the ends of three freshly burned
cigarettes.

"Of course you remember this room?"

He nodded. "Yes. It was night when I came, like this. The next day I
went after John Keith."

She leaned toward him, her hands clasped in front of her on the table.
"You will tell me the truth about John Keith?" she asked in a low,
tense voice. "You swear that it will be the truth?"

"I will keep nothing back from you that I have told Inspector
McDowell," he answered, fighting to meet her eyes steadily. "I almost
believe I may tell you more."

"Then--did you speak the truth when you reported to Inspector McDowell?
IS JOHN KEITH DEAD?" Could Shan Tung meet those wonderful eyes as he
was meeting them now, he wondered? Could he face them and master them,
as McDowell had hinted? To McDowell the lie had come easily to his
tongue. It stuck in his throat now. Without giving him time to prepare
himself the girl had shot straight for the bull's-eye, straight to the
heart of the thing that meant life or death to him, and for a moment he
found no answer. Clearly he was facing suspicion. She could not have
driven the shaft intuitively. The unexpectedness of the thing
astonished him and then thrilled him, and in the thrill of it he found
himself more than ever master of himself.

"Would you like to hear how utterly John Keith is dead and how he
died?" he asked.

"Yes. That is what I must know."

He noticed that her hands had closed. Her slender fingers were clenched
tight.

"I hesitate, because I have almost promised to tell you even more than
I told McDowell," he went on. "And that will not be pleasant for you to
hear. He killed your father. There can be no sympathy in your heart for
John Keith. It will not be pleasant for you to hear that I liked the
man, and that I am sorry he is dead."

"Go on--please."

Her hands unclasped. Her fingers lay limp. Something faded slowly out
of her face. It was as if she had hoped for something, and that hope
was dying. Could it be possible that she had hoped he would say that
John Keith was alive?

"Did you know this man?" he asked.

"This John Keith?"

She shook her head. "No. I was away at school for many years. I don't
remember him."

"But he knew you--that is, he had seen you," said Keith. "He used to
talk to me about you in those days when he was helpless and dying. He
said that he was sorry for you, and that only because of you did he
ever regret the justice he brought upon your father. You see I speak
his words. He called it justice. He never weakened on that point. You
have probably never heard his part of the story."

"No."

The one word forced itself from her lips. She was expecting him to go
on, and waited, her eyes never for an instant leaving his face.

He did not repeat the story exactly as he had told it to McDowell. The
facts were the same, but the living fire of his own sympathy and his
own conviction were in them now. He told it purely from Keith's point
of view, and Miriam Kirkstone's face grew whiter, and her hands grew
tense again, as she listened for the first time to Keith's own version
of the tragedy of the room in which they were sitting. And then he
followed Keith up into that land of ice and snow and gibbering Eskimos,
and from that moment he was no longer Keith but spoke with the lips of
Conniston. He described the sunless weeks and months of madness until
the girl's eyes seemed to catch fire, and when at last he came to the
little cabin in which Conniston had died, he was again John Keith. He
could not have talked about himself as he did about the Englishman. And
when he came to the point where he buried Conniston under the floor, a
dry, broken sob broke in upon him from across the table. But there were
no tears in the girl's eyes. Tears, perhaps, would have hidden from him
the desolation he saw there. But she did not give in. Her white throat
twitched. She tried to draw her breath steadily. And then she said:

"And that--was John Keith!"

He bowed his head in confirmation of the lie, and, thinking of
Conniston, he said:

"He was the finest gentleman I ever knew. And I am sorry he is dead."

"And I, too, am sorry."

She was reaching a hand across the table to him, slowly, hesitatingly.
He stared at her.

"You mean that?"

"Yes, I am sorry."

He took her hand. For a moment her fingers tightened about his own.
Then they relaxed and drew gently away from him. In that moment he saw
a sudden change come into her face. She was looking beyond him, over
his right shoulder. Her eyes widened, her pupils dilated under his
gaze, and she held her breath. With the swift caution of the man-hunted
he turned. The room was empty behind him. There was nothing but a
window at his back. The rain was drizzling against it, and he noticed
that the curtain was not drawn, as they were drawn at the other
windows. Even as he looked, the girl went to it and pulled down the
shade. He knew that she had seen something, something that had startled
her for a moment, but he did not question her. Instead, as if he had
noticed nothing, he asked if he might light a cigar.

"I see someone smokes," he excused himself, nodding at the cigarette
butts.

He was watching her closely and would have recalled the words in the
next breath. He had caught her. Her brother was out of town. And there
was a distinctly unAmerican perfume in the smoke that someone had left
in the room. He saw the bit of red creeping up her throat into her
cheeks, and his conscience shamed him. It was difficult for him not to
believe McDowell now. Shan Tung had been there. It was Shan Tung who
had left the hall as he entered. Probably it was Shan Tung whose face
she had seen at the window.

What she said amazed him. "Yes, it is a shocking habit of mine, Mr.
Conniston. I learned to smoke in the East. Is it so very bad, do you
think?"

He fairly shook himself. He wanted to say, "You beautiful little liar,
I'd like to call your bluff right now, but I won't, because I'm sorry
for you!" Instead, he nipped off the end of his cigar, and said:

"In England, you know, the ladies smoke a great deal. Personally I may
be a little prejudiced. I don't know that it is sinful, especially when
one uses such good judgment--in orientals." And then he was powerless
to hold himself back. He smiled at her frankly, unafraid. "I don't
believe you smoke," he added.

He rose to his feet, still smiling across at her, like a big brother
waiting for her confidence. She was not alarmed at the directness with
which he had guessed the truth. She was no longer embarrassed. She
seemed for a moment to be looking through him and into him, a strange
and yearning desire glowing dully in her eyes. He saw her throat
twitching again, and he was filled with an infinite compassion for this
daughter of the man he had killed. But he kept it within himself. He
had gone far enough. It was for her to speak. At the door she gave him
her hand again, bidding him good-night. She looked pathetically
helpless, and he thought that someone ought to be there with the right
to take her in his arms and comfort her.

"You will come again?" she whispered.

"Yes, I am coming again," he said. "Good-night."

He passed out into the drizzle. The door closed behind him, but not
before there came to him once more that choking sob from the throat of
Miriam Kirkstone.




IX


Keith's hand was on the butt of his revolver as he made his way through
the black night. He could not see the gravel path under his feet but
could only feel it. Something that was more than a guess made him feel
that Shan Tung was not far away, and he wondered if it was a
premonition, and what it meant. With the keen instinct of a hound he
was scenting for a personal danger. He passed through the gate and
began the downward slope toward town, and not until then did he begin
adding things together and analyzing the situation as it had
transformed itself since he had stood in the door of the Shack,
welcoming the storm from the western mountains. He thought that he had
definitely made up his mind then; now it was chaotic. He could not
leave Prince Albert immediately, as the inspiration had moved him a few
hours before. McDowell had practically given him an assignment. And
Miss Kirkstone was holding him. Also Shan Tung. He felt within himself
the sensation of one who was traveling on very thin ice, yet he could
not tell just where or why it was thin.

"Just a fool hunch," he assured himself.

"Why the deuce should I let a confounded Chinaman and a pretty girl get
on my nerves at this stage of the game? If it wasn't for McDowell--"

And there he stopped. He had fought too long at the raw edge of things
to allow himself to be persuaded by delusions, and he confessed that it
was John Keith who was holding him, that in some inexplicable way John
Keith, though officially dead and buried, was mixed up in a mysterious
affair in which Miriam Kirkstone and Shan Tung were the moving factors.
And inasmuch as he was now Derwent Conniston and no longer John Keith,
he took the logical point of arguing that the affair was none of his
business, and that he could go on to the mountains if he pleased. Only
in that direction could he see ice of a sane and perfect thickness, to
carry out the metaphor in his head. He could report indifferently to
McDowell, forget Miss Kirkstone, and disappear from the menace of Shan
Tung's eyes. John Keith, he repeated, would be officially dead, and
being dead, the law would have no further interest in him.

He prodded himself on with this thought as he fumbled his way through
darkness down into town. Miriam Kirkstone in her golden way was
alluring; the mystery that shadowed the big house on the hill was
fascinating to his hunting instincts; he had the desire, growing fast,
to come at grips with Shan Tung. But he had not foreseen these things,
and neither had Conniston foreseen them. They had planned only for the
salvation of John Keith's precious neck, and tonight he had almost
forgotten the existence of that unpleasant reality, the hangman. Truth
settled upon him with depressing effect, and an infinite loneliness
turned his mind again to the mountains of his dreams.

The town was empty of life. Lights glowed here and there through the
mist; now and then a door opened; down near the river a dog howled
forlornly. Everything was shut against him. There were no longer homes
where he might call and be greeted with a cheery "Good evening, Keith.
Glad to see you. Come in out of the wet." He could not even go to
Duggan, his old river friend. He realized now that his old friends were
the very ones he must avoid most carefully to escape self-betrayal.
Friendship no longer existed for him; the town was a desert without an
oasis where he might reclaim some of the things he had lost. Memories
he had treasured gave place to bitter ones. His own townfolk, of all
people, were his readiest enemies, and his loneliness clutched him
tighter, until the air itself seemed thick and difficult to breathe.
For the time Derwent Conniston was utterly submerged in the
overwhelming yearnings of John Keith.

He dropped into a dimly lighted shop to purchase a box of cigars. It
was deserted except for the proprietor. His elbow bumped into a
telephone. He would call up Wallie and tell him to have a good fire
waiting for him, and in the company of that fire he would do a lot of
thinking before getting into communication with McDowell.

It was not Wallie who answered him, and he was about to apologize for
getting the wrong number when the voice at the other end asked,

"Is that you, Conniston?"

It was McDowell. The discovery gave him a distinct shock. What could
the Inspector be doing up at the Shack in his absence? Besides, there
was an imperative demand in the question that shot at him over the
wire. McDowell had half shouted it.

"Yes, it's I," he said rather feebly.

"I'm down-town, stocking up on some cigars. What's the excitement?"

"Don't ask questions but hustle up here," McDowell fired back. "I've
got the surprise of your life waiting for you!"

Keith heard the receiver at the other end go up with a bang. Something
had happened at the Shack, and McDowell was excited. He went out
puzzled. For some reason he was in no great hurry to reach the top of
the hill. He was beginning to expect things to happen--too many
things--and in the stress of the moment he felt the incongruity of the
friendly box of cigars tucked under his arm. The hardest luck he had
ever run up against had never quite killed his sense of humor, and he
chuckled. His fortunes were indeed at a low ebb when he found a bit of
comfort in hugging a box of cigars still closer.

He could see that every room in the Shack was lighted, when he came to
the crest of the slope, but the shades were drawn. He wondered if
Wallie had pulled down the curtains, or if it was a caution on
McDowell's part against possible espionage. Suspicion made him transfer
the box of cigars to his left arm so that his right was free. Somewhere
in the darkness Conniston's voice was urging him, as it had urged him
up in the cabin on the Barren: "Don't walk into a noose. If it comes to
a fight, FIGHT!"

And then something happened that brought his heart to a dead stop. He
was close to the door. His ear was against it. And he was listening to
a voice. It was not Wallie's, and it was not the iron man's. It was a
woman's voice, or a girl's.

He opened the door and entered, taking swiftly the two or three steps
that carried him across the tiny vestibule to the big room. His
entrance was so sudden that the tableau in front of him was unbroken
for a moment. Birch logs were blazing in the fireplace. In the big
chair sat McDowell, partly turned, a smoking cigar poised in his
fingers, staring at him. Seated on a footstool, with her chin in the
cup of her hands, was a girl. At first, blinded a little by the light,
Keith thought she was a child, a remarkably pretty child with
wide-open, half-startled eyes and a wonderful crown of glowing, brown
hair in which he could still see the shimmer of wet. He took off his
hat and brushed the water from his eyes. McDowell did not move. Slowly
the girl rose to her feet. It was then that Keith saw she was not a
child. Perhaps she was eighteen, a slim, tired-looking, little thing,
wonderfully pretty, and either on the verge of laughing or crying.
Perhaps it was halfway between. To his growing discomfiture she came
slowly toward him with a strange and wonderful look in her face. And
McDowell still sat there staring.

His heart thumped with an emotion he had no time to question. In those
wide-open, shining eyes of the girl he sensed unspeakable tragedy--for
him. And then the girl's arms were reaching out to him, and she was
crying in that voice that trembled and broke between sobs and laughter:

"Derry, don't you know me? Don't you know me?"

He stood like one upon whom had fallen the curse of the dumb. She was
within arm's reach of him, her face white as a cameo, her eyes glowing
like newly-fired stars, her slim throat quivering, and her arms
reaching toward him.

"Derry, don't you know me? DON'T YOU KNOW ME?"

It was a sob, a cry. McDowell had risen. Overwhelmingly there swept
upon Keith an impulse that rocked him to the depth of his soul. He
opened his arms, and in an instant the girl was in them. Quivering, and
sobbing, and laughing she was on his breast. He felt the crush of her
soft hair against his face, her arms were about his neck, and she was
pulling his head down and kissing him--not once or twice, but again and
again, passionately and without shame. His own arms tightened. He heard
McDowell's voice--a distant and non-essential voice it seemed to him
now--saying that he would leave them alone and that he would see them
again tomorrow. He heard the door open and close. McDowell was gone.
And the soft little arms were still tight about his neck. The sweet
crush of hair smothered his face, and on his breast she was crying now
like a baby. He held her closer. A wild exultation seized upon him, and
every fiber in his body responded to its thrill, as tautly-stretched
wires respond to an electrical storm. It passed swiftly, burning itself
out, and his heart was left dead. He heard a sound made by Wallie out
in the kitchen. He saw the walls of the room again, the chair in which
McDowell had sat, the blazing fire. His arms relaxed. The girl raised
her head and put her two hands to his face, looking at him with eyes
which Keith no longer failed to recognize. They were the eyes that had
looked at him out of the faded picture in Conniston's watch.

"Kiss me, Derry!"

It was impossible not to obey. Her lips clung to him. There was love,
adoration, in their caress.

And then she was crying again, with her arms around him tight and her
face hidden against him, and he picked her up as he would have lifted a
child, and carried her to the big chair in front of the fire. He put
her in it and stood before her, trying to smile. Her hair had loosened,
and the shining mass of it had fallen about her face and to her
shoulders. She was more than ever like a little girl as she looked up
at him, her eyes worshiping him, her lips trying to smile, and one
little hand dabbing her eyes with a tiny handkerchief that was already
wet and crushed.

"You--you don't seem very glad to see me, Derry."

"I--I'm just stunned," he managed to say. "You see--"

"It IS a shocking surprise, Derry. I meant it to be. I've been planning
it for years and years and YEARS! Please take off your coat--it's
dripping wet!--and sit down near me, on that stool!"

Again he obeyed. He was big for the stool.

"You are glad to see me, aren't you, Derry?"

She was leaning over the edge of the big chair, and one of her hands
went to his damp hair, brushing it back. It was a wonderful touch. He
had never felt anything like it before in his life, and involuntarily
he bent his head a little. In a moment she had hugged it up close to
her.

"You ARE glad, aren't you, Derry? Say 'yes.'"

"Yes," he whispered.

He could feel the swift, excited beating of her heart.

"And I'm never going back again--to THEM," he heard her say, something
suddenly low and fierce in her voice. "NEVER! I'm going to stay with
you always, Derry. Always!"

She put her lips close to his ear and whispered mysteriously. "They
don't know where I am. Maybe they think I'm dead. But Colonel
Reppington knows. I told him I was coming if I had to walk round the
world to get here. He said he'd keep my secret, and gave me letters to
some awfully nice people over here. I've been over six months. And when
I saw your name in one of those dry-looking, blue-covered, paper books
the Mounted Police get out, I just dropped down on my knees and thanked
the good Lord, Derry. I knew I'd find you somewhere--sometime. I
haven't slept two winks since leaving Montreal! And I guess I really
frightened that big man with the terrible mustaches, for when I rushed
in on him tonight, dripping wet, and said, 'I'm Miss Mary Josephine
Conniston, and I want my brother,' his eyes grew bigger and bigger
until I thought they were surely going to pop out at me. And then he
swore. He said, 'My Gawd, I didn't know he had a sister!'"

Keith's heart was choking him. So this wonderful little creature was
Derwent Conniston's sister! And she was claiming him. She thought he
was her brother!

"--And I love him because he treated me so nicely," she was saying. "He
really hugged me, Derry. I guess he didn't think I was away past
eighteen. And he wrapped me up in a big oilskin, and we came up here.
And--O Derry, Derry--why did you do it? Why didn't you let me know?
Don't you--want me here?"

He heard, but his mind had swept beyond her to the little cabin in the
edge of the Great Barren where Derwent Conniston lay dead. He heard the
wind moaning, as it had moaned that night the Englishman died, and he
saw again that last and unspoken yearning in Conniston's eyes. And he
knew now why Conniston's face had followed him through the gray gloom
and why he had felt the mysterious presence of him long after he had
gone. Something that was Conniston entered into him now. In the
throbbing chaos of his brain a voice was whispering, "She is yours, she
is yours."

His arms tightened about her, and a voice that was not unlike John
Keith's voice said: "Yes, I want you! I want you!"




X


For a space Keith did not raise his head. The girl's arms were about
him close, and he could feel the warm pressure of her cheek against his
hair. The realization of his crime was already weighing his soul like a
piece of lead, yet out of that soul had come the cry, "I want you--I
want you!" and it still beat with the voice of that immeasurable
yearning even as his lips grew tight and he saw himself the monstrous
fraud he was. This strange little, wonderful creature had come to him
from out of a dead world, and her lips, and her arms, and the soft
caress of her hands had sent his own world reeling about his head so
swiftly that he had been drawn into a maelstrom to which he could find
no bottom. Before McDowell she had claimed him. And before McDowell he
had accepted her. He had lived the great lie as he had strengthened
himself to live it, but success was no longer a triumph. There rushed
into his brain like a consuming flame the desire to confess the truth,
to tell this girl whose arms were about him that he was not Derwent
Conniston, her brother, but John Keith, the murderer. Something drove
it back, something that was still more potent, more demanding, the
overwhelming urge of that fighting force in every man which calls for
self-preservation.

Slowly he drew himself away from her, knowing that for this night at
least his back was to the wall. She was smiling at him from out of the
big chair, and in spite of himself he smiled back at her.

"I must send you to bed now, Mary Josephine, and tomorrow we will talk
everything over," he said. "You're so tired you're ready to fall asleep
in a minute."

Tiny, puckery lines came into her pretty forehead. It was a trick he
loved at first sight.

"Do you know, Derry, I almost believe you've changed a lot. You used to
call me 'Juddy.' But now that I'm grown up, I think I like Mary
Josephine better, though you oughtn't to be quite so stiff about it.
Derry, tell me honest--are you AFRAID of me?"

"Afraid of you!"

"Yes, because I'm grown up. Don't you like me as well as you did one,
two, three, seven years ago? If you did, you wouldn't tell me to go to
bed just a few minutes after you've seen me for the first time in all
those--those--Derry, I'm going to cry! I AM!"

"Don't," he pleaded. "Please don't!"

He felt like a hundred-horned bull in a very small china shop. Mary
Josephine herself saved the day for him by jumping suddenly from the
big chair, forcing him into it, and snuggling herself on his knees.

"There!" She looked at a tiny watch on her wrist. "We're going to bed
in two hours. We've got a lot to talk about that won't wait until
tomorrow, Derry. You understand what I mean. I couldn't sleep until
you've told me. And you must tell me the truth. I'll love you just the
same, no matter what it is. Derry, Derry, WHY DID YOU DO IT?"

"Do what?" he asked stupidly.

The delicious softness went out of the slim little body on his knees.
It grew rigid. He looked hopelessly into the fire, but he could feel
the burning inquiry in the girl's eyes. He sensed a swift change
passing through her. She seemed scarcely to breathe, and he knew that
his answer had been more than inadequate. It either confessed or
feigned an ignorance of something which it would have been impossible
for him to forget had he been Conniston. He looked up at her at last.
The joyous flush had gone out of her face. It was a little drawn. Her
hand, which had been snuggling his neck caressingly, slipped down from
his shoulder.

"I guess--you'd rather I hadn't come, Derry," she said, fighting to
keep a break out of her voice. "And I'll go back, if you want to send
me. But I've always dreamed of your promise, that some day you'd send
for me or come and get me, and I'd like to know WHY before you tell me
to go. Why have you hidden away from me all these years, leaving me
among those who you knew hated me as they hated you? Was it because you
didn't care? Or was it because--because--" She bent her head and
whispered strangely, "Was it because you were afraid?"

"Afraid?" he repeated slowly, staring again into the fire. "Afraid--"
He was going to add "Of what?" but caught the words and held them back.

The birch fire leaped up with a sudden roar into the chimney, and from
the heart of the flame he caught again that strange and all-pervading
thrill, the sensation of Derwent Conniston's presence very near to him.
It seemed to him that for an instant he caught a flash of Conniston's
face, and somewhere within him was a whispering which was Conniston's
voice. He was possessed by a weird and masterful force that swept over
him and conquered him, a thing that was more than intuition and greater
than physical desire. It was inspiration. He knew that the Englishman
would have him play the game as he was about to play it now.

The girl was waiting for him to answer. Her lips had grown a little
more tense. His hesitation, the restraint in his welcome of her, and
his apparent desire to evade that mysterious something which seemed to
mean so much to her had brought a shining pain into her eyes. He had
seen such a look in the eyes of creatures physically hurt. He reached
out with his hands and brushed back the thick, soft hair from about her
face. His fingers buried themselves in the silken disarray, and he
looked for a moment straight into her eyes before he spoke.

"Little girl, will you tell me the truth?" he asked. "Do I look like
the old Derwent Conniston, YOUR Derwent Conniston? Do I?"

Her voice was small and troubled, yet the pain was slowly fading out of
her eyes as she felt the passionate embrace of his fingers in her hair.
"No. You are changed."

"Yes, I am changed. A part of Derwent Conniston died seven years ago.
That part of him was dead until he came through that door tonight and
saw you. And then it flickered back into life. It is returning slowly,
slowly. That which was dead is beginning to rouse itself, beginning to
remember. See, little Mary Josephine. It was this!"

He drew a hand to his forehead and placed a finger on the scar. "I got
that seven years ago. It killed a half of Derwent Conniston, the part
that should have lived. Do you understand? Until tonight--"

Her eyes startled him, they were growing so big and dark and staring,
living fires of understanding and horror. It was hard for him to go on
with the lie. "For many weeks I was dead," he struggled on. "And when I
came to life physically, I had forgotten a great deal. I had my name,
my identity, but only ghastly dreams and visions of what had gone
before. I remembered you, but it was in a dream, a strange and haunting
dream that was with me always. It seems to me that for an age I have
been seeking for a face, a voice, something I loved above all else on
earth, something which was always near and yet was never found. It was
you, Mary Josephine, you!"

Was it the real Derwent Conniston speaking now? He felt again that
overwhelming force from within which was not his own. The thing that
had begun as a lie struck him now as a thing that was truth. It was he,
John Keith, who had been questing and yearning and hoping. It was John
Keith, and not Conniston, who had returned into a world filled with a
desolation of loneliness, and it was to John Keith that a beneficent
God had sent this wonderful creature in an hour that was blackest in
its despair. He was not lying now. He was fighting. He was fighting to
keep for himself the one atom of humanity that meant more to him than
all the rest of the human race, fighting to keep a great love that had
come to him out of a world in which he no longer had a friend or a
home, and to that fight his soul went out as a drowning man grips at a
spar on a sea. As the girl's hands came to his face and he heard the
yearning, grief-filled cry of his name on her lips, he no longer sensed
the things he was saying, but held her close in his arms, kissing her
mouth, and her eyes, and her hair, and repeating over and over again
that now he had found her he would never give her up. Her arms clung to
him. They were like two children brought together after a long
separation, and Keith knew that Conniston's love for this girl who was
his sister must have been a splendid thing. And his lie had saved
Conniston as well as himself. There had been no time to question the
reason for the Englishman's neglect--for his apparent desertion of the
girl who had come across the sea to find him. Tonight it was sufficient
that HE was Conniston, and that to him the girl had fallen as a
precious heritage.

He stood up with her at last, holding her away from him a little so
that he could look into her face wet with tears and shining with
happiness. She reached up a hand to his face, so that it touched the
scar, and in her eyes he saw an infinite pity, a luminously tender glow
of love and sympathy and understanding that no measurements could
compass. Gently her hand stroked his scarred forehead. He felt his old
world slipping away from under his feet, and with his triumph there
surged over him a thankfulness for that indefinable something that had
come to him in time to give him the strength and the courage to lie.
For she believed him, utterly and without the shadow of a suspicion she
believed him.

"Tomorrow you will help me to remember a great many things," he said.
"And now will you let me send you to bed, Mary Josephine?"

She was looking at the scar. "And all those years I didn't know," she
whispered. "I didn't know. They told me you were dead, but I knew it
was a lie. It was Colonel Reppington--" She saw something in his face
that stopped her.

"Derry, DON'T YOU REMEMBER?"

"I shall--tomorrow. But tonight I can see nothing and think of nothing
but you. Tomorrow--"

She drew his head down swiftly and kissed the brand made by the heated
barrel of the Englishman's pistol. "Yes, yes, we must go to bed now,
Derry," she cried quickly. "You must not think too much. Tonight it
must just be of me. Tomorrow everything will come out right,
everything. And now you may send me to bed. Do you remember--"

She caught herself, biting her lip to keep back the word.

"Tell me," he urged. "Do I remember what?"

"How you used to come in at the very last and tuck me in at night,
Derry? And how we used to whisper to ourselves there in the darkness,
and at last you would kiss me good-night? It was the kiss that always
made me go to sleep."

He nodded. "Yes, I remember," he said.

He led her to the spare room, and brought in her two travel-worn bags,
and turned on the light. It was a man's room, but Mary Josephine stood
for a moment surveying it with delight.

"It's home, Derry, real home," she whispered.

He did not explain to her that it was a borrowed home and that this was
his first night in it. Such unimportant details would rest until
tomorrow. He showed her the bath and its water system and then
explained to Wallie that his sister was in the house and he would have
to bunk in the kitchen. At the last he knew what he was expected to do,
what he must do. He kissed Mary Josephine good night. He kissed her
twice. And Mary Josephine kissed him and gave him a hug the like of
which he had never experienced until this night. It sent him back to
the fire with blood that danced like a drunken man's.

He turned the lights out and for an hour sat in the dying glow of the
birch. For the first time since he had come from Miriam Kirkstone's he
had the opportunity to think, and in thinking he found his brain
crowded with cold and unemotional fact. He saw his lie in all its naked
immensity. Yet he was not sorry that he had lied. He had saved
Conniston. He had saved himself. And he had saved Conniston's sister,
to love, to fight for, to protect. It had not been a Judas lie but a
lie with his heart and his soul and all the manhood in him behind it.
To have told the truth would have made him his own executioner, it
would have betrayed the dead Englishman who had given to him his name
and all that he possessed, and it would have dragged to a pitiless
grief the heart of a girl for whom the sun still continued to shine. No
regret rose before him now. He felt no shame. All that he saw was the
fight, the tremendous fight, ahead of him, his fight to make good as
Conniston, his fight to play the game as Conniston would have him play
it. The inspiration that had come to him as he stood facing the storm
from the western mountains possessed him again. He would go to the
river's end as he had planned to go before McDowell told him of Shan
Tung and Miriam Kirkstone. And he would not go alone. Mary Josephine
would go with him.

It was midnight when he rose from the big chair and went to his room.
The door was closed. He opened it and entered. Even as his hand groped
for the switch on the wall, his nostrils caught the scent of something
which was familiar and yet which should not have been there. It filled
the room, just as it had filled the big hall at the Kirkstone house,
the almost sickening fragrance of agallochum burned in a cigarette. It
hung like a heavy incense. Keith's eyes glared as he scanned the room
under the lights, half expecting to see Shan Tung sitting there waiting
for him. It was empty. His eyes leaped to the two windows. The shade
was drawn at one, the other was up, and the window itself was open an
inch or two above the sill. Keith's hand gripped his pistol as he went
to it and drew the curtain. Then he turned to the table on which were
the reading lamp and Brady's pipes and tobacco and magazines. On an
ash-tray lay the stub of a freshly burned cigarette. Shan Tung had come
secretly, but he had made no effort to cover his presence.

It was then that Keith saw something on the table which had not been
there before. It was a small, rectangular, teakwood box no larger than
a half of the palm of his hand. He had noticed Miriam Kirkstone's
nervous fingers toying with just such a box earlier in the evening.
They were identical in appearance. Both were covered with an exquisite
fabric of oriental carving, and the wood was stained and polished until
it shone with the dark luster of ebony. Instantly it flashed upon him
that this was the same box he had seen at Miriam's. She had sent it to
him, and Shan Tung had been her messenger. The absurd thought was in
his head as he took up a small white square of card that lay on top of
the box. The upper side of this card was blank; on the other side, in a
script as exquisite in its delicacy as the carving itself, were the
words:

"WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF SHAN TUNG."

In another moment Keith had opened the box. Inside was a carefully
folded slip of paper, and on this paper was written a single line.
Keith's heart stopped beating, and his blood ran cold as he read what
it held for him, a message of doom from Shan Tung in nine words:

"WHAT HAPPENED TO DERWENT CONNISTON? DID YOU KILL HIM?"




XI


Stunned by a shock that for a few moments paralyzed every nerve center
in his body, John Keith stood with the slip of white paper in his
hands. He was discovered! That was the one thought that pounded like a
hammer in his brain. He was discovered in the very hour of his triumph
and exaltation, in that hour when the world had opened its portals of
joy and hope for him again and when life itself, after four years of
hell, was once more worth the living. Had the shock come a few hours
before, he would have taken it differently. He was expecting it then.
He had expected it when he entered McDowell's office the first time. He
was prepared for it afterward. Discovery, failure, and death were
possibilities of the hazardous game he was playing, and he was
unafraid, because he had only his life to lose, a life that was not
much more than a hopeless derelict at most. Now it was different. Mary
Josephine had come like some rare and wonderful alchemy to transmute
for him all leaden things into gold. In a few minutes she had upset the
world. She had literally torn aside for him the hopeless chaos in which
he saw himself struggling, flooding him with the warm radiance of a
great love and a still greater desire. On his lips he could feel the
soft thrill of her good-night kiss and about his neck the embrace of
her soft arms. She had not gone to sleep yet. Across in the other room
she was thinking of him, loving him; perhaps she was on her knees
praying for him, even as he held in his fingers Shan Tung's mysterious
forewarning of his doom.

The first impulse that crowded in upon him was that of flight, the
selfish impulse of personal salvation. He could get away. The night
would swallow him up. A moment later he was mentally castigating
himself for the treachery of that impulse to Mary Josephine. His
floundering senses began to readjust themselves.

Why had Shan Tung given him this warning? Why had he not gone straight
to Inspector McDowell with the astounding disclosure of the fact that
the man supposed to be Derwent Conniston was not Derwent Conniston, but
John Keith, the murderer of Miriam Kirkstone's father?

The questions brought to Keith a new thrill. He read the note again. It
was a definite thing stating a certainty and not a guess. Shan Tung had
not shot at random. He knew. He knew that he was not Derwent Conniston
but John Keith. And he believed that he had killed the Englishman to
steal his identity. In the face of these things he had not gone to
McDowell! Keith's eyes fell upon the card again. "With the compliments
of Shan Tung." What did the words mean? Why had Shan Tung written them
unless--with his compliments--he was giving him a warning and the
chance to save himself?

His immediate alarm grew less. The longer he contemplated the slip of
paper in his hand, the more he became convinced that the inscrutable
Shan Tung was the last individual in the world to stage a bit of
melodrama without some good reason for it. There was but one conclusion
he could arrive at. The Chinaman was playing a game of his own, and he
had taken this unusual way of advising Keith to make a getaway while
the going was good. It was evident that his intention had been to avoid
the possibility of a personal discussion of the situation. That, at
least, was Keith's first impression.

He turned to examine the window. There was no doubt that Shan Tung had
come in that way. Both the sill and curtain bore stains of water and
mud, and there was wet dirt on the floor. For once the immaculate
oriental had paid no attention to his feet. At the door leading into
the big room Keith saw where he had stood for some time, listening,
probably when McDowell and Mary Josephine were in the outer room
waiting for him. Suddenly his eyes riveted themselves on the middle
panel of the door. Brady had intended his color scheme to be old
ivory--the panel itself was nearly white--and on it Shan Tung had
written heavily with a lead pencil the hour of his presence, "10.45
P.M." Keith's amazement found voice in a low exclamation. He looked at
his watch. It was a quarter-hour after twelve. He had returned to the
Shack before ten, and the clever Shan Tung was letting him know in this
cryptic fashion that for more than three-quarters of an hour he had
listened at the door and spied upon him and Mary Josephine through the
keyhole.

Had even such an insignificant person as Wallie been guilty of that
act, Keith would have felt like thrashing him. It surprised himself
that he experienced no personal feeling of outrage at Shan Tung's frank
confession of eavesdropping. A subtle significance began to attach
itself more and more to the story his room was telling him. He knew
that Shan Tung had left none of the marks of his presence out of
bravado, but with a definite purpose. Keith's psychological mind was at
all times acutely ready to seize upon possibilities, and just as his
positiveness of Conniston's spiritual presence had inspired him to act
his lie with Mary Josephine, so did the conviction possess him now that
his room held for him a message of the most vital importance.

In such an emergency Keith employed his own method. He sat down,
lighted his pipe again, and centered the full resource of his mind on
Shan Tung, dissociating himself from the room and the adventure of the
night as much as possible in his objective analysis of the man. Four
distinct emotional factors entered into that analysis--fear, distrust,
hatred, personal enmity. To his surprise he found himself drifting
steadily into an unusual and unexpected mental attitude. From the time
he had faced Shan Tung in the inspector's office, he had regarded him
as the chief enemy of his freedom, his one great menace. Now he felt
neither personal enmity nor hatred for him. Fear and distrust remained,
but the fear was impersonal and the distrust that of one who watches a
clever opponent in a game or a fight. His conception of Shan Tung
changed. He found his occidental mind running parallel with the
oriental, bridging the spaces which otherwise it never would have
crossed, and at the end it seized upon the key. It proved to him that
his first impulse had been wrong. Shan Tung had not expected him to
seek safety in flight. He had given the white man credit for a larger
understanding than that. His desire, first of all, had been to let
Keith know that he was not the only one who was playing for big stakes,
and that another, Shan Tung himself, was gambling a hazard of his own,
and that the fraudulent Derwent Conniston was a trump card in that game.

To impress this upon Keith he had, first of all, acquainted him with
the fact that he had seen through his deception and that he knew he was
John Keith and not Derwent Conniston. He had also let him know that he
believed he had killed the Englishman, a logical supposition under the
circumstances. This information he had left for Keith was not in the
form of an intimidation. There was, indeed, something very near
apologetic courtesy in the presence of the card bearing Shan Tung's
compliments. The penciling of the hour on the panel of the door,
without other notation, was a polite and suggestive hint. He wanted
Keith to know that he understood his peculiar situation up until that
particular time, that he had heard and possibly seen much that had
passed between him and Mary Josephine. The partly opened window, the
mud and wet on curtains and floor, and the cigarette stubs were all to
call Keith's attention to the box on the table.

Keith could not but feel a certain sort of admiration for the Chinaman.
The two questions he must answer now were, What was Shan Tung's game?
and What did Shan Tung expect him to do?

Instantly Miriam Kirkstone flashed upon him as the possible motive for
Shan Tung's visit. He recalled her unexpected and embarrassing question
of that evening, in which she had expressed a suspicion and a doubt as
to John Keith's death. He had gone to Miriam's at eight. It must have
been very soon after that, and after she had caught a glimpse of the
face at the window, that Shan Tung had hurried to the Shack.

Slowly but surely the tangled threads of the night's adventure were
unraveling themselves for Keith. The main facts pressed upon him, no
longer smothered in a chaos of theory and supposition. If there had
been no Miriam Kirkstone in the big house on the hill, Shan Tung would
have gone to McDowell, and he would have been in irons at the present
moment. McDowell had been right after all. Miriam Kirkstone was
fighting for something that was more than her existence. The thought of
that "something" made Keith writhe and his hands clench. Shan Tung had
triumphed but not utterly. A part of the fruit of his triumph was still
just out of his reach, and the two--beautiful Miss Kirkstone and the
deadly Shan Tung--were locked in a final struggle for its possession.
In some mysterious way he, John Keith, was to play the winning hand.
How or when he could not understand. But of one thing he was convinced;
in exchange for whatever winning card he held Shan Tung had offered him
his life. Tomorrow he would expect an answer.

That tomorrow had already dawned. It was one o'clock when Keith again
looked at his watch. Twenty hours ago he had cooked his last camp-fire
breakfast. It was only eighteen hours ago that he had filled himself
with the smell of Andy Duggan's bacon, and still more recently that he
had sat in the little barber shop on the corner wondering what his fate
would be when he faced McDowell. It struck him as incongruous and
impossible that only fifteen hours had passed since then. If he
possessed a doubt of the reality of it all, the bed was there to help
convince him. It was a real bed, and he had not slept in a real bed for
a number of years. Wallie had made it ready for him. Its sheets were
snow-white. There was a counterpane with a fringe on it and pillows
puffed up with billowy invitation, as if they were on the point of
floating away. Had they risen before his eyes, Keith would have
regarded the phenomenon rather casually. After the swift piling up of
the amazing events of those fifteen hours, a floating pillow would have
seemed quite in the natural orbit of things. But they did not float.
They remained where they were, their white breasts bared to him, urging
upon him a common-sense perspective of the situation. He wasn't going
to run away. He couldn't sit up all night. Therefore why not come to
them and sleep?

There was something directly personal in the appeal of the pillows and
the bed. It was not general; it was for him. And Keith responded.

He made another note of the time, a half-hour after one, when he turned
in. He allotted himself four hours of sleep, for it was his intention
to be up with the sun.




XII


Necessity had made of Keith a fairly accurate human chronometer. In the
second year of his fugitivism he had lost his watch. At first it was
like losing an arm, a part of his brain, a living friend. From that
time until he came into possession of Conniston's timepiece he was his
own hour-glass and his own alarm clock. He became proficient.

Brady's bed and the Circe-breasted pillows that supported his head were
his undoing. The morning after Shan Tung's visit he awoke to find the
sun flooding in through the eastern window of his room, The warmth of
it as it fell full in his face, setting his eyes blinking, told him it
was too late. He guessed it was eight o'clock. When he fumbled his
watch out from under his pillow and looked at it, he found it was a
quarter past. He got up quietly, his mind swiftly aligning itself to
the happenings of yesterday. He stretched himself until his muscles
snapped, and his chest expanded with deep breaths of air from the
windows he had left open when he went to bed. He was fit. He was ready
for Shan Tung, for McDowell. And over this physical readiness there
surged the thrill of a glorious anticipation. It fairly staggered him
to discover how badly he wanted to see Mary Josephine again.

He wondered if she was still asleep and answered that there was little
possibility of her being awake--even at eight o'clock. Probably she
would sleep until noon, the poor, tired, little thing! He smiled
affectionately into the mirror over Brady's dressing-table. And then
the unmistakable sound of voices in the outer room took him curiously
to the door. They were subdued voices. He listened hard, and his heart
pumped faster. One of them was Wallie's voice; the other was Mary
Josephine's.

He was amused with himself at the extreme care with which he proceeded
to dress. It was an entirely new sensation. Wallie had provided him
with the necessaries for a cold sponge and in some mysterious interim
since their arrival had brushed and pressed the most important of
Conniston's things. With the Englishman's wardrobe he had brought up
from barracks a small chest which was still locked. Until this morning
Keith had not noticed it. It was less than half as large as a steamer
trunk and had the appearance of being intended as a strong box rather
than a traveling receptacle. It was ribbed by four heavy bands of
copper, and the corners and edges were reinforced with the same metal.
The lock itself seemed to be impregnable to one without a key.
Conniston's name was heavily engraved on a copper tablet just above the
lock.

Keith regarded the chest with swiftly growing speculation. It was not a
thing one would ordinarily possess. It was an object which, on the face
of it, was intended to be inviolate except to its master key, a holder
of treasure, a guardian of mystery and of precious secrets. In the
little cabin up on the Barren Conniston had said rather indifferently,
"You may find something among my things down there that will help you
out." The words flashed back to Keith. Had the Englishman, in that
casual and uncommunicative way of his, referred to the contents of this
chest? Was it not possible that it held for him a solution to the
mystery that was facing him in the presence of Mary Josephine? A sense
of conviction began to possess him. He examined the lock more closely
and found that with proper tools it could be broken.

He finished dressing and completed his toilet by brushing his beard. On
account of Mary Josephine he found himself regarding this hirsute
tragedy with a growing feeling of disgust, in spite of the fact that it
gave him an appearance rather distinguished and military. He wanted it
off. Its chief crime was that it made him look older. Besides, it was
inclined to be reddish. And it must tickle and prick like the deuce
when--

He brought himself suddenly to salute with an appreciative grin.
"You're there, and you've got to stick," he chuckled. After all, he was
a likable-looking chap, even with that handicap. He was glad.

He opened his door so quietly that Mary Josephine did not see him at
first. Her back was toward him as she bent over the dining-table. Her
slim little figure was dressed in some soft stuff all crinkly from
packing. Her hair, brown and soft, was piled up in shining coils on the
top of her head. For the life of him Keith couldn't keep his eyes from
traveling from the top of that glowing head to the little high-heeled
feet on the floor. They were adorable, slim little, aristocratic feet
with dainty ankles! He stood looking at her until she turned and caught
him.

There was a change since last night. She was older. He could see it
now, the utter impropriety of his cuddling her up like a baby in the
big chair--the impossibility, almost.

Mary Josephine settled his doubt. With a happy little cry she ran to
him, and Keith found her arms about him again and her lovely mouth held
up to be kissed. He hesitated for perhaps the tenth part of a second,
if hesitation could be counted in that space. Then his arms closed
about her, and he kissed her. He felt the snuggle of her face against
his breast again, the crush and sweetness of her hair against his lips
and cheek. He kissed her again uninvited. Before he could stop the
habit, he had kissed her a third time.

Then her hands were at his face, and he saw again that look in her
eyes, a deep and anxious questioning behind the shimmer of love in
them, something mute and understanding and wonderfully sympathetic, a
mothering soul looking at him and praying as it looked. If his life had
paid the forfeit the next instant, he could not have helped kissing her
a fourth time.

If Mary Josephine had gone to bed with a doubt of his brotherly
interest last night, the doubt was removed now. Her cheeks flushed. Her
eyes shone. She was palpitantly, excitedly happy. "It's YOU, Derry,"
she cried. "Oh, it's you as you used to be!"

She seized his hand and drew him toward the table. Wallie thrust in his
head from the kitchenette, grinning, and Mary Josephine flashed him
back a meaning smile. Keith saw in an instant that Wallie had turned
from his heathen gods to the worship of something infinitely more
beautiful. He no longer looked to Keith for instructions.

Mary Josephine sat down opposite Keith at the table. She was telling
him, with that warm laughter and happiness in her eyes, how the sun had
wakened her, and how she had helped Wallie get breakfast. For the first
time Keith was looking at her from a point of vantage; there was just
so much distance between them, no more and no less, and the light was
right. She was, to him, exquisite. The little puckery lines came into
her smooth forehead when he apologized for his tardiness by explaining
that he had not gone to bed until one o'clock. Her concern was
delightful. She scolded him while Wallie brought in the breakfast, and
inwardly he swelled with the irrepressible exultation of a great
possessor. He had never had anyone to scold him like that before. It
was a scolding which expressed Mary Josephine's immediate
proprietorship of him, and he wondered if the pleasure of it made him
look as silly as Wallie. His plans were all gone. He had intended to
play the idiotic part of one who had partly lost his memory, but
throughout the breakfast he exhibited no sign that he was anything but
healthfully normal. Mary Josephine's delight at the improvement of his
condition since last night shone in her face and eyes, and he could see
that she was strictly, but with apparent unconsciousness, guarding
herself against saying anything that might bring up the dread shadow
between them. She had already begun to fight her own fight for him, and
the thing was so beautiful that he wanted to go round to her, and get
down on his knees, and put his head in her lap, and tell her the truth.

It was in the moment of that thought that the look came into his face
which brought the questioning little lines into her forehead again. In
that instant she caught a glimpse of the hunted man, of the soul that
had traded itself, of desire beaten into helplessness by a thing she
would never understand. It was gone swiftly, but she had caught it. And
for her the scar just under his hair stood for its meaning. The
responsive throb in her breast was electric. He felt it, saw it, sensed
it to the depth of his soul, and his faith in himself stood challenged.
She believed. And he--was a liar. Yet what a wonderful thing to lie for!

"--He called me up over the telephone, and when I told him to be quiet,
that you were still asleep, I think he must have sworn--it sounded like
it, but I couldn't hear distinctly--and then he fairly roared at me to
wake you up and tell you that you didn't half deserve such a lovely
little sister as I am. Wasn't that nice, Derry?"

"You--you're talking about McDowell?"

"To be sure I am talking about Mr. McDowell! And when I told him your
injury troubled you more than usual, and that I was glad you were
resting, I think I heard him swallow hard. He thinks a lot of you,
Derry. And then he asked me WHICH injury it was that hurt you, and I
told him the one in the head. What did he mean? Were you hurt somewhere
else, Derry?"

Keith swallowed hard, too. "Not to speak of," he said. "You see, Mary
Josephine, I've got a tremendous surprise for you, if you'll promise it
won't spoil your appetite. Last night was the first night I've spent in
a real bed for three years."

And then, without waiting for her questions, he began to tell her the
epic story of John Keith. With her sitting opposite him, her beautiful,
wide-open, gray eyes looking at him with amazement as she sensed the
marvelous coincidence of their meeting, he told it as he had not told
it to McDowell or even to Miriam Kirkstone. A third time the facts were
the same. But it was John Keith now who was telling John Keith's story
through the lips of an unreal and negative Conniston. He forgot his own
breakfast, and a look of gloom settled on Wallie's face when he peered
in through the door and saw that their coffee and toast were growing
cold. Mary Josephine leaned a little over the table. Not once did she
interrupt Keith. Never had he dreamed of a glory that might reflect his
emotions as did her eyes. As he swept from pathos to storm, from the
madness of long, black nights to starvation and cold, as he told of
flight, of pursuit, of the merciless struggle that ended at last in the
capture of John Keith, as he gave to these things words and life
pulsing with the beat of his own heart, he saw them revisioned in those
wonderful gray eyes, cold at times with fear, warm and glowing at other
times with sympathy, and again shining softly with a glory of pride and
love that was meant for him alone. With him she was present in the
little cabin up in the big Barren. Until he told of those days and
nights of hopeless desolation, of racking cough and the nearness of
death, and of the comradeship of brothers that had come as a final
benediction to the hunter and the hunted, until in her soul she was
understanding and living those terrible hours as they two had lived
them, he did not know how deep and dark and immeasurably tender that
gray mystery of beauty in her eyes could be. From that hour he
worshiped them as he worshiped no other part of her.

"And from all that you came back the same day I came," she said in a
low, awed voice. "You came back from THAT!"

He remembered the part he must play.

"Yes, three years of it. If I could only remember as well, only half as
well, things that happened before this--" He raised a hand to his
forehead, to the scar.

"You will," she whispered swiftly. "Derry, darling, you will!"

Wallie sidled in and, with an adoring grin at Mary Josephine, suggested
that he had more coffee and toast ready to serve, piping hot. Keith was
relieved. The day had begun auspiciously, and over the bacon and eggs,
done to a ravishing brown by the little Jap, he told Mary Josephine of
some of his bills of fare in the north and how yesterday he had filled
up on bacon smell at Andy Duggan's. Steak from the cheek of a walrus,
he told her, was equal to porterhouse; seal meat wasn't bad, but one
grew tired of it quickly unless he was an Eskimo; polar bear meat was
filling but tough and strong. He liked whale meat, especially the
tail-steaks of narwhal, and cold boiled blubber was good in the winter,
only it was impossible to cook it because of lack of fuel, unless one
was aboard ship or had an alcohol stove in his outfit. The tidbit of
the Eskimo was birds' eggs, gathered by the ton in summer-time, rotten
before cold weather came, and frozen solid as chunks of ice in winter.
Through one starvation period of three weeks he had lived on them
himself, crunching them raw in his mouth as one worries away with a
piece of rock candy. The little lines gathered in Mary Josephine's
forehead at this, but they smoothed away into laughter when he
humorously described the joy of living on nothing at all but air. And
he added to this by telling her how the gluttonous Eskimo at feast-time
would lie out flat on their backs so that their womenfolk could feed
them by dropping chunks of flesh into their open maws until their
stomachs swelled up like the crops of birds overstuffed with grain.

It was a successful breakfast. When it was over, Keith felt that he had
achieved a great deal. Before they rose from the table, he startled
Mary Josephine by ordering Wallie to bring him a cold chisel and a
hammer from Brady's tool-chest.

"I've lost the key that opens my chest, and I've got to break in," he
explained to her.

Mary Josephine's little laugh was delicious. "After what you told me
about frozen eggs, I thought perhaps you were going to eat some," she
said.

She linked her arm in his as they walked into the big room, snuggling
her head against his shoulder so that, leaning over, his lips were
buried in one of the soft, shining coils of her hair. And she was
making plans, enumerating them on the tips of her fingers. If he had
business outside, she was going with him. Wherever he went she was
going. There was no doubt in her mind about that. She called his
attention to a trunk that had arrived while he slept, and assured him
she would be ready for outdoors by the time he had opened his chest.
She had a little blue suit she was going to wear. And her hair? Did it
look good enough for his friends to see? She had put it up in a hurry.

"It is beautiful, glorious," he said.

Her face pinked under the ardency of his gaze. She put a finger to the
tip of his nose, laughing at him. "Why, Derry, if you weren't my
brother I'd think you were my lover! You said that as though you meant
it TERRIBLY much. Do you?"

He felt a sudden dull stab of pain, "Yes, I mean it. It's glorious. And
so are you, Mary Josephine, every bit of you."

On tiptoe she gave him the warm sweetness of her lips again. And then
she ran away from him, joy and laughter in her face, and disappeared
into her room. "You must hurry or I shall beat you," she called back to
him.




XIII


In his own room, with the door closed and locked, Keith felt again that
dull, strange pain that made his heart sick and the air about him
difficult to breathe.

"IF YOU WEREN'T MY BROTHER."

The words beat in his brain. They were pounding at his heart until it
was smothered, laughing at him and taunting him and triumphing over him
just as, many times before, the raving voices of the weird wind-devils
had scourged him from out of black night and arctic storm. HER BROTHER!
His hand clenched until the nails bit into his flesh. No, he hadn't
thought of that part of the fight! And now it swept upon him in a
deluge. If he lost in the fight that was ahead of him, his life would
pay the forfeit. The law would take him, and he would hang. And if he
won--she would be his sister forever and to the end of all time! Just
that, and no more. His SISTER! And the agony of truth gripped him that
it was not as a brother that he saw the glory in her hair, the glory in
her eyes and face, and the glory in her slim little, beautiful
body--but as the lover. A merciless preordination had stacked the cards
against him again. He was Conniston, and she was Conniston's sister.

A strong man, a man in whom blood ran red, there leaped up in him for a
moment a sudden and unreasoning rage at that thing which he had called
fate. He saw the unfairness of it all, the hopelessness of it, the
cowardly subterfuge and trickery of life itself as it had played
against him, and with tightly set lips and clenched hands he called
mutely on God Almighty to play the game square. Give him a chance! Give
him just one square deal, only one; let him see a way, let him fight a
man's fight with a ray of hope ahead! In these red moments hope
emblazoned itself before his eyes as a monstrous lie. Bitterness rose
in him until he was drunk with it, and blasphemy filled his heart.
Whichever way he turned, however hard he fought, there was no chance of
winning. From the day he killed Kirkstone the cards had been stacked
against him, and they were stacked now and would be stacked until the
end. He had believed in God, he had believed in the inevitable ethics
of the final reckoning of things, and he had believed strongly that an
impersonal Something more powerful than man-made will was behind him in
his struggles. These beliefs were smashed now. Toward them he felt the
impulse of a maddened beast trampling hated things under foot. They
stood for lies--treachery--cheating--yes, contemptible cheating! It was
impossible for him to win. However he played, whichever way he turned,
he must lose. For he was Conniston, and she was Conniston's sister, AND
MUST BE TO THE END OF TIME.

Faintly, beyond the door, he heard Mary Josephine singing. Like a bit
of steel drawn to a tension his normal self snapped back into place.
His readjustment came with a lurch, a subtle sort of shock. His hands
unclenched, the tense lines in his face relaxed, and because that God
Almighty he had challenged had given to him an unquenchable humor, he
saw another thing where only smirking ghouls and hypocrites had rent
his brain with their fiendish exultations a moment before. It was
Conniston's face, suave, smiling, dying, triumphant over life, and
Conniston was saying, just as he had said up there in the cabin on the
Barren, with death reaching out a hand for him, "It's queer, old top,
devilish queer--and funny!"

Yes, it was funny if one looked at it right, and Keith found himself
swinging back into his old view-point. It was the hugest joke life had
ever played on him. His sister! He could fancy Conniston twisting his
mustaches, his cool eyes glimmering with silent laughter, looking on
his predicament, and he could fancy Conniston saying: "It's funny, old
top, devilish funny--but it'll be funnier still when some other man
comes along and carries her off!"

And he, John Keith, would have to grin and bear it because he was her
brother!

Mary Josephine was tapping at his door.

"Derwent Conniston," she called frigidly, "there's a female person on
the telephone asking for you. What shall I say?"

"Er--why--tell her you're my sister, Mary Josephine, and if it's Miss
Kirkstone, be nice to her and say I'm not able to come to the 'phone,
and that you're looking forward to meeting her, and that we'll be up to
see her some time today."

"Oh, indeed!"

"You see," said Keith, his mouth close to the door, "you see, this Miss
Kirkstone--"

But Mary Josephine was gone.

Keith grinned. His illimitable optimism was returning. Sufficient for
the day that she was there, that she loved him, that she belonged to
him, that just now he was the arbiter of her destiny! Far off in the
mountains he dreamed of, alone, just they two, what might not happen?
Some day--

With the cold chisel and the hammer he went to the chest. His task was
one that numbed his hands before the last of the three locks was
broken. He dragged the chest more into the light and opened it. He was
disappointed. At first glance he could not understand why Conniston had
locked it at all. It was almost empty, so nearly empty that he could
see the bottom of it, and the first object that met his eyes was an
insult to his expectations--an old sock with a huge hole in the toe of
it. Under the sock was an old fur cap not of the kind worn north of
Montreal. There was a chain with a dog-collar attached to it, a
hip-pocket pistol and a huge forty-five, and not less than a hundred
cartridges of indiscriminate calibers scattered loosely about. At one
end, bundled in carelessly, was a pair of riding-breeches, and under
the breeches a pair of white shoes with rubber soles. There was neither
sentiment nor reason to the collection in the chest. It was junk. Even
the big forty-five had a broken hammer, and the pistol, Keith thought,
might have stunned a fly at close range. He pawed the things over with
the cold chisel, and the last thing he came upon--buried under what
looked like a cast-off sport shirt--was a pasteboard shoe box. He
raised the cover. The box was full of papers.

Here was promise. He transported the box to Brady's table and sat down.
He examined the larger papers first. There were a couple of old game
licenses for Manitoba, half a dozen pencil-marked maps, chiefly of the
Peace River country, and a number of letters from the secretaries of
Boards of Trade pointing out the incomparable possibilities their
respective districts held for the homesteader and the buyer of land.
Last of all came a number of newspaper clippings and a packet of
letters.

Because they were loose he seized upon the clippings first, and as his
eyes fell upon the first paragraph of the first clipping his body
became suddenly tensed in the shock of unexpected discovery and amazed
interest. There were six of the clippings, all from English papers,
English in their terseness, brief as stock exchange reports, and
equally to the point. He read the six in three minutes.

They simply stated that Derwent Conniston, of the Connistons of
Darlington, was wanted for burglary--and that up to date he had not
been found.

Keith gave a gasp of incredulity. He looked again to see that his eyes
were not tricking him. And it was there in cold, implacable print.
Derwent Conniston--that phoenix among men, by whom he had come to
measure all other men, that Crichton of nerve, of calm and audacious
courage, of splendid poise--a burglar! It was cheap, farcical, an
impossible absurdity. Had it been murder, high treason, defiance of
some great law, a great crime inspired by a great passion or a great
ideal, but it was burglary, brigandage of the cheapest and most
commonplace variety, a sneaking night-coward's plagiarism of real
adventure and real crime. It was impossible. Keith gritted the words
aloud. He might have accepted Conniston as a Dick Turpin, a Claude
Duval or a Macheath, but not as a Jeremy Diddler or a Bill Sykes. The
printed lines were lies. They must be. Derwent Conniston might have
killed a dozen men, but he had never cracked a safe. To think it was to
think the inconceivable.

He turned to the letters. They were postmarked Darlington, England. His
fingers tingled as he opened the first. It was as he had expected, as
he had hoped. They were from Mary Josephine. He arranged them--nine in
all--in the sequence of their dates, which ran back nearly eight years.
All of them had been written within a period of eleven months. They
were as legible as print. And as he passed from the first to the
second, and from the second to the third, and then read on into the
others, he forgot there was such a thing as time and that Mary
Josephine was waiting for him. The clippings had told him one thing;
here, like bits of driftage to be put together, a line in this place
and half a dozen in that, in paragraphs that enlightened and in others
that puzzled, was the other side of the story, a growing thing that
rose up out of mystery and doubt in segments and fractions of segments
adding themselves together piecemeal, welding the whole into form and
substance, until there rode through Keith's veins a wild thrill of
exultation and triumph.

And then he came to the ninth and last letter. It was in a different
handwriting, brief, with a deadly specificness about it that gripped
Keith as he read.

This ninth letter he held in his hand as he rose from the table, and
out of his mouth there fell, unconsciously, Conniston's own words,
"It's devilish queer, old top--and funny!"

There was no humor in the way he spoke them. His voice was hard, his
eyes dully ablaze. He was looking back into that swirling, unutterable
loneliness of the northland, and he was seeing Conniston again.

Fiercely he caught up the clippings, struck a match, and with a grim
smile watched them as they curled up into flame and crumbled into ash.
What a lie was life, what a malformed thing was justice, what a monster
of iniquity the man-fabricated thing called law!

And again he found himself speaking, as if the dead Englishman himself
were repeating the words, "It's devilish queer, old top--and funny!"




XIV


A quarter of an hour later, with Mary Josephine at his side, he was
walking down the green slope toward the Saskatchewan. In that direction
lay the rims of timber, the shimmering valley, and the broad pathways
that opened into the plains beyond.

The town was at their backs, and Keith wanted it there. He wanted to
keep McDowell, and Shan Tung, and Miriam Kirkstone as far away as
possible, until his mind rode more smoothly in the new orbit in which
it was still whirling a bit unsteadily. More than all else he wanted to
be alone with Mary Josephine, to make sure of her, to convince himself
utterly that she was his to go on fighting for. He sensed the nearness
and the magnitude of the impending drama. He knew that today he must
face Shan Tung, that again he must go under the battery of McDowell's
eyes and brain, and that like a fish in treacherous waters he must swim
cleverly to avoid the nets that would entangle and destroy him. Today
was the day--the stage was set, the curtain about to be lifted, the
play ready to be enacted. But before it was the prologue. And the
prologue was Mary Josephine's.

At the crest of a dip halfway down the slope they had paused, and in
this pause he stood a half-step behind her so that he could look at her
for a moment without being observed. She was bareheaded, and it came
upon him all at once how wonderful was a woman's hair, how beautiful
beyond all other things beautiful and desirable. In twisted, glowing
seductiveness it was piled up on Mary Josephine's head, transformed
into brown and gold glories by the sun. He wanted to put forth his hand
to it, and bury his fingers in it, and feel the thrill and the warmth
and the crush of the palpitant life of it against his own flesh. And
then, bending a little forward, he saw under her long lashes the sheer
joy of life shining in her eyes as she drank in the wonderful panorama
that lay below them to the west. Last night's rain had freshened it,
the sun glorified it now, and the fragrance of earthly smells that rose
up to them from it was the undefiled breath of a thing living and
awake. Even to Keith the river had never looked more beautiful, and
never had his yearnings gone out to it more strongly than in this
moment, to the river and beyond--and to the back of beyond, where the
mountains rose up to meet the blue sky and the river itself was born.
And he heard Mary Josephine's voice, joyously suppressed, exclaiming
softly,

"Oh, Derry!"

His heart was filled with gladness. She, too, was seeing what his eyes
saw in that wonderland. And she was feeling it. Her hand, seeking his
hand, crept into his palm, and the fingers of it clung to his fingers.
He could feel the thrill of the miracle passing through her, the
miracle of the open spaces, the miracle of the forests rising billow on
billow to the purple mists of the horizon, the miracle of the golden
Saskatchewan rolling slowly and peacefully in its slumbering sheen out
of that mighty mysteryland that reached to the lap of the setting sun.
He spoke to her of that land as she looked, wide-eyed, quick-breathing,
her fingers closing still more tightly about his. This was but the
beginning of the glory of the west and the north, he told her. Beyond
that low horizon, where the tree tops touched the sky were the
prairies--not the tiresome monotony which she had seen from the car
windows, but the wide, glorious, God-given country of the Northwest
with its thousands of lakes and rivers and its tens of thousands of
square miles of forests; and beyond those things, still farther, were
the foothills, and beyond the foothills the mountains. And in those
mountains the river down there had its beginning.

She looked up swiftly, her eyes brimming with the golden flash of the
sun. "It is wonderful! And just over there is the town!"

"Yes, and beyond the town are the cities."

"And off there--"

"God's country," said Keith devoutly.

Mary Josephine drew a deep breath. "And people still live in towns and
cities!" she exclaimed in wondering credulity. "I've dreamed of 'over
here,' Derry, but I never dreamed that. And you've had it for years and
years, while I--oh, Derry!"

And again those two words filled his heart with gladness, words of
loving reproach, atremble with the mysterious whisper of a great
desire. For she was looking into the west. And her eyes and her heart
and her soul were in the west, and suddenly Keith saw his way as though
lighted by a flaming torch. He came near to forgetting that he was
Conniston. He spoke of his dream, his desire, and told her that last
night--before she came--he had made up his mind to go. She had come to
him just in time. A little later and he would have been gone, buried
utterly away from the world in the wonderland of the mountains. And now
they would go together. They would go as he had planned to go, quietly,
unobtrusively; they would slip away and disappear. There was a reason
why no one should know, not even McDowell. It must be their secret.
Some day he would tell her why. Her heart thumped excitedly as he went
on like a boy planning a wonderful day. He could see the swifter beat
of it in the flush that rose into her face and the joy glowing
tremulously in her eyes as she looked at him. They would get ready
quietly. They might go tomorrow, the next day, any time. It would be a
glorious adventure, just they two, with all the vastness of that
mountain paradise ahead of them.

"We'll be pals," he said. "Just you and me, Mary Josephine. We're all
that's left."

It was his first experiment, his first reference to the information he
had gained in the letters, and swift as a flash Mary Josephine's eyes
turned up to him. He nodded, smiling. He understood their quick
questioning, and he held her hand closer and began to walk with her
down the slope.

"A lot of it came back last night and this morning, a lot of it," he
explained. "It's queer what miracles small things can work sometimes,
isn't it? Think what a grain of sand can do to a watch! This was one of
the small things." He was still smiling as he touched the scar on his
forehead. "And you, you were the other miracle. And I'm remembering. It
doesn't seem like seven or eight years, but only yesterday, that the
grain of sand got mixed up somewhere in the machinery in my head. And I
guess there was another reason for my going wrong. You'll understand,
when I tell you."

Had he been Conniston it could not have come from him more naturally,
more sincerely. He was living the great lie, and yet to him it was no
longer a lie. He did not hesitate, as shame and conscience might have
made him hesitate. He was fighting that something beautiful might be
raised up out of chaos and despair and be made to exist; he was
fighting for life in place of death, for happiness in place of grief,
for light in place of darkness--fighting to save where others would
destroy. Therefore the great lie was not a lie but a thing without
venom or hurt, an instrument for happiness and for all the things good
and beautiful that went to make happiness. It was his one great weapon.
Without it he would fail, and failure meant desolation. So he spoke
convincingly, for what he said came straight from the heart though it
was born in the shadow of that one master-falsehood. His wonder was
that Mary Josephine believed him so utterly that not for an instant was
there a questioning doubt in her eyes or on her lips.

He told her how much he "remembered," which was no more and no less
than he had learned from the letters and the clippings. The story did
not appeal to him as particularly unusual or dramatic. He had passed
through too many tragic happenings in the last four years to regard it
in that way. It was simply an unfortunate affair beginning in
misfortune, and with its necessary whirlwind of hurt and sorrow. The
one thing of shame he would not keep out of his mind was that he,
Derwent Conniston, must have been a poor type of big brother in those
days of nine or ten years ago, even though little Mary Josephine had
worshiped him. He was well along in his twenties then. The Connistons
of Darlington were his uncle and aunt, and his uncle was a more or less
prominent figure in ship-building interests on the Clyde. With these
people the three--himself, Mary Josephine, and his brother Egbert--had
lived, "farmed out" to a hard-necked, flinty-hearted pair of relatives
because of a brother's stipulation and a certain English law. With them
they had existed in mutual discontent and dislike. Derwent, when he
became old enough, had stepped over the traces. All this Keith had
gathered from the letters, but there was a great deal that was missing.
Egbert, he gathered, must have been a scapegrace. He was a cripple of
some sort and seven or eight years his junior. In the letters Mary
Josephine had spoken of him as "poor Egbert," pitying instead of
condemning him, though it was Egbert who had brought tragedy and
separation upon them. One night Egbert had broken open the Conniston
safe and in the darkness had had a fight and a narrow escape from his
uncle, who laid the crime upon Derwent. And Derwent, in whom Egbert
must have confided, had fled to America that the cripple might be
saved, with the promise that some day he would send for Mary Josephine.
He was followed by the uncle's threat that if he ever returned to
England, he would be jailed. Not long afterward "poor Egbert" was found
dead in bed, fearfully contorted. Keith guessed there had been
something mentally as well as physically wrong with him.

"--And I was going to send for you," he said, as they came to the level
of the valley. "My plans were made, and I was going to send for you,
when this came."

He stopped, and in a few tense, breathless moments Mary Josephine read
the ninth and last letter he had taken from the Englishman's chest. It
was from her uncle. In a dozen lines it stated that she, Mary
Josephine, was dead, and it reiterated the threat against Derwent
Conniston should he ever dare to return to England.

A choking cry came to her lips. "And that--THAT was it?"

"Yes, that--and the hurt in my head," he said, remembering the part he
must play. "They came at about the same time, and the two of them must
have put the grain of sand in my brain."

It was hard to lie now, looking straight into her face that had gone
suddenly white, and with her wonderful eyes burning deep into his soul.

She did not seem, for an instant, to hear his voice or sense his words.
"I understand now," she was saying, the letter crumpling in her
fingers. "I was sick for almost a year, Derry. They thought I was going
to die. He must have written it then, and they destroyed my letters to
you, and when I was better they told me you were dead, and then I
didn't write any more. And I wanted to die. And then, almost a year
ago, Colonel Reppington came to me, and his dear old voice was so
excited that it trembled, and he told me that he believed you were
alive. A friend of his had just returned from British Columbia, and
this friend told him that three years before, while on a grizzly
shooting trip, he had met a man named Conniston, an Englishman. We
wrote a hundred letters up there and found the man, Jack Otto, who was
in the mountains with you, and then I knew you were alive. But we
couldn't find you after that, and so I came--"

He would have wagered that she was going to cry, but she fought the
tears back, smiling.

"And--and I've found you!" she finished triumphantly.

She snuggled close to him, and he slipped an arm about her waist, and
they walked on. She told him about her arrival in Halifax, how Colonel
Reppington had given her letters to nice people in Montreal and
Winnipeg, and how it happened one day that she found his name in one of
the Mounted Police blue books, and after that came on as fast as she
could to surprise him at Prince Albert. When she came to that point,
Keith pointed once more into the west and said:

"And there is our new world. Let us forget the old. Shall we, Mary
Josephine?"

"Yes," she whispered, and her hand sought his again and crept into it,
warm and confident.




XV


They went on through the golden morning, the earth damp under their
feet, the air filled with its sweet incense, on past scattered clumps
of balsams and cedars until they came to the river and looked down on
its yellow sand-bars glistening in the sun. The town was hidden. They
heard no sound from it. And looking up the great Saskatchewan, the
river of mystery, of romance, of glamour, they saw before them, where
the spruce walls seemed to meet, the wide-open door through which they
might pass into the western land beyond. Keith pointed it out. And he
pointed out the yellow bars, the glistening shores of sand, and told
her how even as far as this, a thousand miles by river--those sands
brought gold with them from the mountains, the gold whose
treasure-house no man had ever found, and which must be hidden up there
somewhere near the river's end. His dream, like Duggan's, had been to
find it. Now they would search for it together.

Slowly he was picking his way so that at last they came to the bit of
cleared timber in which was his old home. His heart choked him as they
drew near. There was an uncomfortable tightness in his breath. The
timber was no longer "clear." In four years younger generations of life
had sprung up among the trees, and the place was jungle-ridden. They
were within a few yards of the house before Mary Josephine saw it, and
then she stopped suddenly with a little gasp. For this that she faced
was not desertion, was not mere neglect. It was tragedy. She saw in an
instant that there was no life in this place, and yet it stood as if
tenanted. It was a log chateau with a great, red chimney rising at one
end curtains and shades still hung at the windows. There were three
chairs on the broad veranda that looked riverward. But two of the
windows were broken, and the chairs were falling into ruin. There was
no life. They were facing only the ghosts of life.

A swift glance into Keith's face told her this was so. His lips were
set tight. There was a strange look in his face. Hand in hand they had
come up, and her fingers pressed his tighter now.

"What is it?" she asked.

"It is John Keith's home as he left it four years ago," he replied.

The suspicious break in his voice drew her eyes from the chateau to his
own again. She could see him fighting. There was a twitching in his
throat. His hand was gripping hers until it hurt.

"John Keith?" she whispered softly.

"Yes, John Keith."

She inclined her head so that it rested lightly and affectionately
against his arm.

"You must have thought a great deal of him, Derry."

"Yes."

He freed her hand, and his fists clenched convulsively. She could feel
the cording of the muscles in his arm, his face was white, and in his
eyes was a fixed stare that startled her. He fumbled in a pocket and
drew out a key.

"I promised, when he died, that I would go in and take a last look for
him," he said. "He loved this place. Do you want to go with me?"

She drew a deep breath. "Yes."

The key opened the door that entered on the veranda. As it swung back,
grating on its rusty hinges, they found themselves facing the chill of
a cold and lifeless air. Keith stepped inside. A glance told him that
nothing was changed--everything was there in that room with the big
fireplace, even as he had left it the night he set out to force justice
from Judge Kirkstone. One thing startled him. On the dust-covered table
was a bowl and a spoon. He remembered vividly how he had eaten his
supper that night of bread and milk. It was the littleness of the
thing, the simplicity of it, that shocked him. The bowl and spoon were
still there after four years. He did not reflect that they were as
imperishable as all the other things about; the miracle was that they
were there on the table, as though he had used them only yesterday. The
most trivial things in the room struck him deepest, and he found
himself fighting hard, for a moment, to keep his nerve.

"He told me about the bowl and the spoon, John Keith did," he said,
nodding toward them. "He told me just what I'd find here, even to that.
You see, he loved the place greatly and everything that was in it. It
was impossible for him to forget even the bowl and the spoon and where
he had left them."

It was easier after that. The old home was whispering back its memories
to him, and he told them to Mary Josephine as they went slowly from
room to room, until John Keith was living there before her again, the
John Keith whom Derwent Conniston had run to his death. It was this
thing that gripped her, and at last what was in her mind found voice.

"It wasn't YOU who made him die, was it, Derry? It wasn't you?"

"No. It was the law. He died, as I told you, of a frosted lung. At the
last I would have shared my life with him had it been possible.
McDowell must never know that. You must never speak of John Keith
before him."

"I--I understand, Derry."

"And he must not know that we came here. To him John Keith was a
murderer whom it was his duty to hang."

She was looking at him strangely. Never had he seen her look at him in
that way.

"Derry," she whispered.

"Yes?"

"Derry, IS JOHN KEITH ALIVE?"

He started. The shock of the question was in his face. He caught
himself, but it was too late. And in an instant her hand was at his
mouth, and she was whispering eagerly, almost fiercely:

"No, no, no--don't answer me, Derry! DON'T ANSWER ME! I know, and I
understand, and I'm glad, glad, GLAD! He's alive, and it was you who
let him live, the big, glorious brother I'm proud of! And everyone else
thinks he's dead. But don't answer me, Derry, don't answer me!"

She was trembling against him. His arms closed about her, and he held
her nearer to his heart, and longer, than he had ever held her before.
He kissed her hair many times, and her lips once, and up about his neck
her arms twined softly, and a great brightness was in her eyes.

"I understand," she whispered again. "I understand."

"And I--I must answer you," he said. "I must answer you, because I love
you, and because you must know. Yes, John Keith is alive!"




XVI


An hour later, alone and heading for the inspector's office, Keith felt
in battle trim. His head was fairly singing with the success of the
morning. Since the opening of Conniston's chest many things had
happened, and he was no longer facing a blank wall of mystery. His
chief cause of exhilaration was Mary Josephine. She wanted to go away
with him. She wanted to go with him anywhere, everywhere, as long as
they were together. When she had learned that his term of enlistment
was about to expire and that if he remained in the Service he would be
away from her a great deal, she had pleaded with him not to reenlist.
She did not question him when he told her that it might be necessary to
go away very suddenly, without letting another soul know of their
movements, not even Wallie. Intuitively she guessed that the reason had
something to do with John Keith, for he had let the fear grow in her
that McDowell might discover he had been a traitor to the Service, in
which event the Law itself would take him away from her for a
considerable number of years. And with that fear she was more than ever
eager for the adventure, and planned with him for its consummation.

Another thing cheered Keith. He was no longer the absolute liar of
yesterday, for by a fortunate chance he had been able to tell her that
John Keith was alive. This most important of all truths he had confided
to her, and the confession had roused in her a comradeship that had
proclaimed itself ready to fight for him or run away with him. Not for
an instant had she regretted the action he had taken in giving Keith
his freedom. He was peculiarly happy because of that. She was glad John
Keith was alive.

And now that she knew the story of the old home down in the clump of
timber and of the man who had lived there, she was anxious to meet
Miriam Kirkstone, daughter of the man he had killed. Keith had promised
her they would go up that afternoon. Within himself he knew that he was
not sure of keeping the promise. There was much to do in the next few
hours, and much might happen. In fact there was but little speculation
about it. This was the big day. Just what it held for him he could not
be sure until he saw Shan Tung. Any instant might see him put to the
final test.

Cruze was pacing slowly up and down the hall when Keith entered the
building in which McDowell had his offices. The young secretary's face
bore a perplexed and rather anxious expression. His hands were buried
deep in his trousers pockets, and he was puffing a cigarette. At
Keith's appearance he brightened up a bit.

"Don't know what to make of the governor this morning, by Jove I
don't!" he explained, nodding toward the closed doors. "I've got
instructions to let no one near him except you. You may go in."

"What seems to be the matter?" Keith felt out cautiously.

Cruze shrugged his thin shoulders, nipped the ash from his cigarette,
and with a grimace said, "Shan Tung."

"Shan Tung?" Keith spoke the name in a sibilant whisper. Every nerve in
him had jumped, and for an instant he thought he had betrayed himself.
Shan Tung had been there early. And now McDowell was waiting for him
and had given instructions that no other should be admitted. If the
Chinaman had exposed him, why hadn't McDowell sent officers up to the
Shack? That was the first question that jumped into his head. The
answer came as quickly--McDowell had not sent officers because, hating
Shan Tung, he had not believed his story. But he was waiting there to
investigate. A chill crept over Keith.

Cruze was looking at him intently.

"There's something to this Shan Tung business," he said. "It's even
getting on the old man's nerves. And he's very anxious to see you, Mr.
Conniston. I've called you up half a dozen times in the last hour."

He nipped away his cigarette, turned alertly, and moved toward the
inspector's door. Keith wanted to call him back, to leap upon him, if
necessary, and drag him away from that deadly door. But he neither
moved nor spoke until it was too late. The door opened, he heard Cruze
announce his presence, and it seemed to him the words were scarcely out
of the secretary's mouth when McDowell himself stood in the door.

"Come in, Conniston," he said quietly. "Come in."

It was not McDowell's voice. It was restrained, terrible. It was the
voice of a man speaking softly to cover a terrific fire raging within.
Keith felt himself doomed. Even as he entered, his mind was swiftly
gathering itself for the last play, the play he had set for himself if
the crisis came. He would cover McDowell, bind and gag him even as
Cruze sauntered in the hall, escape through a window, and with Mary
Josephine bury himself in the forests before pursuit could overtake
them. Therefore his amazement was unbounded when McDowell, closing the
door, seized his hand in a grip that made him wince, and shook it with
unfeigned gladness and relief.

"I'm not condemning you, of course," he said. "It was rather beastly of
me to annoy your sister before you were up this morning. She flatly
refused to rouse you, and by George, the way she said it made me turn
the business of getting into touch with you over to Cruze. Sit down,
Conniston. I'm going to explode a mine under you."

He flung himself into his swivel chair and twisted one of his fierce
mustaches, while his eyes blazed at Keith. Keith waited. He saw the
other was like an animal ready to spring and anxious to spring, the one
evident stricture on his desire being that there was nothing to spring
at unless it was himself.

"What happened last night?" he asked.

Keith's mind was already working swiftly. McDowell's question gave him
the opportunity of making the first play against Shan Tung.

"Enough to convince me that I am going to see Shan Tung today," he said.

He noticed the slow clenching and unclenching of McDowell's fingers
about the arms of his chair.

"Then--I was right?"

"I have every reason to believe you were--up to a certain point. I
shall know positively when I have talked with Shan Tung."

He smiled grimly. McDowell's eyes were no harder than his own. The iron
man drew a deep breath and relaxed a bit in his chair.

"If anything should happen," he said, looking away from Keith, as
though the speech were merely casual, "if he attacks you--"

"It might be necessary to kill him in self-defense," finished Keith.

McDowell made no sign to show that he had heard, yet Keith thrilled
with the conviction that he had struck home. He went on telling briefly
what had happened at Miriam Kirkstone's house the preceding night.
McDowell's face was purple when he described the evidences of Shan
Tung's presence at the house on the hill, but with a mighty effort he
restrained his passion.

"That's it, that's it," he exclaimed, choking back his wrath. "I knew
he was there! And this morning both of them lie about it--both of them,
do you understand! She lied, looking me straight in the eyes. And he
lied, and for the first time in his life he laughed at me, curse me if
he didn't! It was like the gurgle of oil. I didn't know a human could
laugh that way. And on top of that he told me something that I WON'T
believe, so help me God, I won't!"

He jumped to his feet and began pacing back and forth, his hands
clenched behind him. Suddenly he whirled on Keith.

"Why in heaven's name didn't you bring Keith back with you, or, if not
Keith, at least a written confession, signed by him?" he demanded.

This was a blow from behind for Keith. "What--what has Keith got to do
with this?" he stumbled.

"More than I dare tell you, Conniston. But WHY didn't you bring back a
signed confession from him? A dying man is usually willing to make
that."

"If he is guilty, yes," agreed Keith. "But this man was a different
sort. If he killed Judge Kirkstone, he had no regret. He did not
consider himself a criminal. He felt that he had dealt out justice in
his own way, and therefore, even when he was dying, he would not sign
anything or state anything definitely."

McDowell subsided into his chair.

"And the curse of it is I haven't a thing on Shan Tung," he gritted.
"Not a thing. Miriam Kirkstone is her own mistress, and in the eyes of
the law he is as innocent of crime as I am. If she is voluntarily
giving herself as a victim to this devil, it is her own
business--legally, you understand. Morally--"

He stopped, his savagely gleaming eyes boring Keith to the marrow.

"He hates you as a snake hates fire-water. It is possible, if he
thought the opportunity had come to him--"

Again he paused, cryptic, waiting for the other to gather the thing he
had not spoken. Keith, simulating two of Conniston's tricks at the same
time, shrugged a shoulder and twisted a mustache as he rose to his
feet. He smiled coolly down at the iron man. For once he gave a
passable imitation of the Englishman.

"And he's going to have the opportunity today," he said
understandingly. "I think, old chap, I'd better be going. I'm rather
anxious to see Shan Tung before dinner."

McDowell followed him to the door.

His face had undergone a change. There was a tense expectancy, almost
an eagerness there. Again he gripped Keith's hand, and before the door
opened he said,

"If trouble comes between you let it be in the open, Conniston--in the
open and not on Shan Tung's premises."

Keith went out, his pulse quickening to the significance of the iron
man's words, and wondering what the "mine" was that McDowell had
promised to explode, but which he had not.




XVII


Keith lost no time in heading for Shan Tung's. He was like a man
playing chess, and the moves were becoming so swift and so intricate
that his mind had no rest. Each hour brought forth its fresh
necessities and its new alternatives. It was McDowell who had given him
his last cue, perhaps the surest and safest method of all for winning
his game. The iron man, that disciple of the Law who was merciless in
his demand of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, had let him
understand that the world would be better off without Shan Tung. This
man, who never in his life had found an excuse for the killer, now
maneuvered subtly the suggestion for a killing.

Keith was both shocked and amazed. "If anything happens, let it be in
the open and not on Shan Tung's premises," he had warned him. That
implied in McDowell's mind a cool and calculating premeditation, the
assumption that if Shan Tung was killed it would be in self-defense.
And Keith's blood leaped to the thrill of it. He had not only found the
depths of McDowell's personal interest in Miriam Kirkstone, but a last
weapon had been placed in his hands, a weapon which he could use this
day if it became necessary. Cornered, with no other hope of saving
himself, he could as a last resort kill Shan Tung--and McDowell would
stand behind him!

He went directly to Shan Tung's cafe and sauntered in. There were large
changes in it since four years ago. The moment he passed through its
screened vestibule, he felt its oriental exclusiveness, the sleek and
mysterious quietness of it. One might have found such a place catering
to the elite of a big city. It spoke sumptuously of a large expenditure
of money, yet there was nothing bizarre or irritating to the senses.
Its heavily-carved tables were almost oppressive in their solidity.
Linen and silver, like Shan Tung himself, were immaculate.
Magnificently embroidered screens were so cleverly arranged that one
saw not all of the place at once, but caught vistas of it. The few
voices that Keith heard in this pre-lunch hour were subdued, and the
speakers were concealed by screens. Two orientals, as immaculate as the
silver and linen, were moving about with the silence of velvet-padded
lynxes. A third, far in the rear, stood motionless as one of the carven
tables, smoking a cigarette and watchful as a ferret. This was Li King,
Shan Tung's right-hand man.

Keith approached him. When he was near enough, Li King gave the
slightest inclination to his head and took the cigarette from his
mouth. Without movement or speech he registered the question, "What do
you want?"

Keith knew this to be a bit of oriental guile. In his mind there was no
doubt that Li King had been fully instructed by his master and that he
had been expecting him, even watching for him. Convinced of this, he
gave him one of Conniston's cards and said,

"Take this to Shan Tung. He is expecting me."

Li King looked at the card, studied it for a moment with apparent
stupidity, and shook his head. "Shan Tung no home. Gone away."

That was all. Where he had gone or when he would return Keith could not
discover from Li King. Of all other matters except that he had gone
away the manager of Shan Tung's affairs was ignorant. Keith felt like
taking the yellow-skinned hypocrite by the throat and choking something
out of him, but he realized that Li King was studying and watching him,
and that he would report to Shan Tung every expression that had passed
over his face. So he looked at his watch, bought a cigar at the glass
case near the cash register, and departed with a cheerful nod, saying
that he would call again.

Ten minutes later he determined on a bold stroke. There was no time for
indecision or compromise. He must find Shan Tung and find him quickly.
And he believed that Miriam Kirkstone could give him a pretty good tip
as to his whereabouts. He steeled himself to the demand he was about to
make as he strode up to the house on the hill. He was disappointed
again. Miss Kirkstone was not at home. If she was, she did not answer
to his knocking and bell ringing.

He went to the depot. No one he questioned had seen Shan Tung at the
west-bound train, the only train that had gone out that morning, and
the agent emphatically disclaimed selling him a ticket. Therefore he
had not gone far. Suspicion leaped red in Keith's brain. His
imagination pictured Shan Tung at that moment with Miriam Kirkstone,
and at the thought his disgust went out against them both. In this
humor he returned to McDowell's office. He stood before his chief,
leaning toward him over the desk table. This time he was the inquisitor.

"Plainly speaking, this liaison is their business," he declared.
"Because he is yellow and she is white doesn't make it ours. I've just
had a hunch. And I believe in following hunches, especially when one
hits you good and hard, and this one has given me a jolt that means
something. Where is that big fat brother of hers?"

McDowell hesitated. "It isn't a liaison," he temporized. "It's
one-sided--a crime against--"

"WHERE IS THAT BIG FAT BROTHER?" With each word Keith emphasized his
demand with a thud of his fist on the table. "WHERE IS HE?"

McDowell was deeply perturbed. Keith could see it and waited.

After a moment of silence the iron man rose from the swivel chair,
walked to the window, gazed out for another moment, and walked back
again, twisting one of his big gray mustaches in a way that betrayed
the stress of his emotion. "Confound it, Conniston, you've got a mind
for seeking out the trivialities, and little things are sometimes the
most embarrassing."

"And sometimes most important," added Keith. "For instance, it strikes
me as mighty important that we should know where Peter Kirkstone is and
why he is not here fighting for his sister's salvation. Where is he?"

"I don't know. He disappeared from town a month ago. Miriam says he is
somewhere in British Columbia looking over some old mining properties.
She doesn't know just where."

"And you believe her?"

The eyes of the two men met. There was no longer excuse for
equivocation. Both understood.

McDowell smiled in recognition of the fact. "No. I think, Conniston,
that she is the most wonderful little liar that lives. And the
beautiful part of it is, she is lying for a purpose. Imagine Peter
Kirkstone, who isn't worth the powder to blow him to Hades, interested
in old mines or anything else that promises industry or production! And
the most inconceivable thing about the whole mess is that Miriam
worships that fat and worthless pig of a brother. I've tried to find
him in British Columbia. Failed, of course. Another proof that this
affair between Miriam and Shan Tung isn't a voluntary liaison on her
part. She's lying. She's walking on a pavement of lies. If she told the
truth--"

"There are some truths which one cannot tell about oneself,"
interrupted Keith. "They must be discovered or buried. And I'm going
deeper into this prospecting and undertaking business this afternoon.
I've got another hunch. I think I'll have something interesting to
report before night."

Ten minutes later, on his way to the Shack, he was discussing with
himself the modus operandi of that "hunch." It had come to him in an
instant, a flash of inspiration. That afternoon he would see Miriam
Kirkstone and question her about Peter. Then he would return to
McDowell, lay stress on the importance of the brother, tell him that he
had a clew which he wanted to follow, and suggest finally a swift trip
to British Columbia. He would take Mary Josephine, lie low until his
term of service expired, and then report by letter to McDowell that he
had failed and that he had made up his mind not to reenlist but to try
his fortunes with Mary Josephine in Australia. Before McDowell received
that letter, they could be on their way into the mountains. The "hunch"
offered an opportunity for a clean getaway, and in his jubilation
Miriam Kirkstone and her affairs were important only as a means to an
end. He was John Keith now, fighting for John Keith's life--and Derwent
Conniston's sister.

Mary Josephine herself put the first shot into the fabric of his plans.
She must have been watching for him, for when halfway up the slope he
saw her coming to meet him. She scolded him for being away from her, as
he had expected her to do. Then she pulled his arm about her slim
little waist and held the hand thus engaged in both her own as they
walked up the winding path. He noticed the little wrinkles in her
adorable forehead.

"Derry, is it the right thing for young ladies to call on their
gentlemen friends over here?" she asked suddenly.

"Why--er--that depends, Mary Josephine. You mean--"

"Yes, I do, Derwent Conniston! She's pretty, and I don't blame you, but
I can't help feeling that I don't like it!"

His arm tightened about her until she gasped. The fragile softness of
her waist was a joy to him.

"Derry!" she remonstrated. "If you do that again, I'll break!"

"I couldn't help it," he pleaded. "I couldn't, dear. The way you said
it just made my arm close up tight. I'm glad you didn't like it. I can
love only one at a time, and I'm loving you, and I'm going on loving
you all my life."

"I wasn't jealous," she protested, blushing. "But she called twice on
the telephone and then came up. And she's pretty."

"I suppose you mean Miss Kirkstone?"

"Yes. She was frightfully anxious to see you, Derry."

"And what did you think of her, dear?"

She cast a swift look up into his face.

"Why, I like her. She's sweet and pretty, and I fell in love with her
hair. But something was troubling her this morning. I'm quite sure of
it, though she tried to keep it back."

"She was nervous, you mean, and pale, with sometimes a frightened look
in her eyes. Was that it?"

"You seem to know, Derry. I think it was all that."

He nodded. He saw his horizon aglow with the smile of fortune.
Everything was coming propitiously for him, even this unexpected visit
of Miriam Kirkstone. He did not trouble himself to speculate as to the
object of her visit, for he was grappling now with his own opportunity,
his chance to get away, to win out for himself in one last
master-stroke, and his mind was concentrated in that direction. The
time was ripe to tell these things to Mary Josephine. She must be
prepared.

On the flat table of the hill where Brady had built his bungalow were
scattered clumps of golden birch, and in the shelter of one of the
nearer clumps was a bench, to which Keith drew Mary Josephine.
Thereafter for many minutes he spoke his plans. Mary Josephine's cheeks
grew flushed. Her eyes shone with excitement and eagerness. She
thrilled to the story he told her of what they would do in those
wonderful mountains of gold and mystery, just they two alone. He made
her understand even more definitely that his safety and their mutual
happiness depended upon the secrecy of their final project, that in a
way they were conspirators and must act as such. They might start for
the west tonight or tomorrow, and she must get ready.

There he should have stopped. But with Mary Josephine's warm little
hand clinging to his and her beautiful eyes shining at him like liquid
stars, he felt within him an overwhelming faith and desire, and he went
on, making a clean breast of the situation that was giving them the
opportunity to get away. He felt no prick of conscience at thought of
Miriam Kirkstone's affairs. Her destiny must be, as he had told
McDowell, largely a matter of her own choosing. Besides, she had
McDowell to fight for her. And the big fat brother, too. So without
fear of its effect he told Mary Josephine of the mysterious liaison
between Miriam Kirkstone and Shan Tung, of McDowell's suspicions, of
his own beliefs, and how it was all working out for their own good.

Not until then did he begin to see the changing lights in her eyes. Not
until he had finished did he notice that most of that vivid flush of
joy had gone from her face and that she was looking at him in a
strained, tense way. He felt then the reaction. She was not looking at
the thing as he was looking at it. He had offered to her another
woman's tragedy as THEIR opportunity, and her own woman's heart had
responded in the way that has been woman's since the dawn of life. A
sense of shame which he fought and tried to crush took possession of
him. He was right. He must be right, for it was his life that was
hanging in the balance. Yet Mary Josephine could not know that.

Her fingers had tightened about his, and she was looking away from him.
He saw now that the color had almost gone from her face. There was the
flash of a new fire in her yes.

"And THAT was why she was nervous and pale, with sometimes a frightened
look in her eyes," she spoke softly, repeating his words. "It was
because of this Chinese monster, Shan Tung--because he has some sort of
power over her, you say--because--"

She snatched her hand from his with a suddenness that startled him. Her
eyes, so beautiful and soft a few minutes before, scintillated fire.
"Derry, if you don't fix this heathen devil--I WILL!"

She stood up before him, breathing quickly, and he beheld in her not
the soft, slim-waisted little goddess of half an hour ago, but the
fiercest fighter of all the fighting ages, a woman roused. And no
longer fear, but a glory swept over him. She was Conniston's sister,
AND SHE WAS CONNISTON. Even as he saw his plans falling about him, he
opened his arms and held them out to her, and with the swiftness of
love she ran into them, putting her hands to his face while he held her
close and kissed her lips.

"You bet we'll fix that heathen devil before we go," he said. "You bet
we will--SWEETHEART!"




XVIII


Wallie, suffering the outrage of one who sees his dinner growing cold,
found Keith and Mary Josephine in the edge of the golden birch and
implored them to come and eat. It was a marvel of a dinner. Over Mary
Josephine's coffee and Keith's cigar they discussed their final plans.
Keith made the big promise that he would "fix Shan Tung" in a hurry,
perhaps that very afternoon. In the glow of Mary Josephine's proud eyes
he felt no task too large for him, and he was eager to be at it. But
when his cigar was half done, Mary Josephine came around and perched
herself on the arm of his chair, and began running her fingers through
his hair. All desire to go after Shan Tung left him. He would have
remained there forever. Twice she bent down and touched his forehead
lightly with her lips. Again his arm was round her soft little waist,
and his heart was pumping like a thing overworked. It was Mary
Josephine, finally, who sent him on his mission, but not before she
stood on tiptoe, her hands on his shoulders, giving him her mouth to
kiss.

An army at his back could not have strengthened Keith with a vaster
determination than that kiss. There would be no more quibbling. His
mind was made up definitely on the point. And his first move was to
head straight for the Kirkstone house on the hill.

He did not get as far as the door this time. He caught a vision of
Miriam Kirkstone in the shrubbery, bareheaded, her hair glowing
radiantly in the sun. It occurred to him suddenly that it was her hair
that roused the venom in him when he thought of her as the property of
Shan Tung. If it had been black or even brown, the thought might not
have emphasized itself so unpleasantly in his mind. But that vivid gold
cried out against the crime, even against the girl herself. She saw him
almost in the instant his eyes fell upon her, and came forward quickly
to meet him. There was an eagerness in her face that told him his
coming relieved her of a terrific suspense.

"I'm sorry I wasn't at the Shack when you came, Miss Kirkstone," he
said, taking for a moment the hand she offered him. "I fancy you were
up there to see me about Shan Tung."

He sent the shot bluntly, straight home. In the tone of his voice there
was no apology. He saw her grow cold, her eyes fixed on him staringly,
as though she not only heard his words but saw what was in his mind.

"Wasn't that it, Miss Kirkstone?"

She nodded affirmatively, but her lips did not move.

"Shan Tung," he repeated. "Miss Kirkstone, what is the trouble? Why
don't you confide in someone, in McDowell, in me, in--"

He was going to say "your brother," but the suddenness with which she
caught his arm cut the words short.

"Shan Tung has been to see him--McDowell?" she questioned excitedly.
"He has been there today? And he told him--" She stopped, breathing
quickly, her fingers tightening on his arm.

"I don't know what passed between them," said Keith. "But McDowell was
tremendously worked up about you. So am I. We might as well be frank,
Miss Kirkstone. There's something rotten in Denmark when two people
like you and Shan Tung mix up. And you are mixed; you can't deny it.
You have been to see Shan Tung late at night. He was in the house with
you the first night I saw you. More than that--HE IS IN YOUR HOUSE NOW!"

She shrank back as if he had struck at her. "No, no, no," she cried.
"He isn't there. I tell you, he isn't!"

"How am I to believe you?" demanded Keith. "You have not told the truth
to McDowell. You are fighting to cover up the truth. And we know it is
because of Shan Tung. WHY? I am here to fight for you, to help you. And
McDowell, too. That is why we must know. Miss Kirkstone, do you love
the Chinaman?"

He knew the words were an insult. He had guessed their effect. As if
struck there suddenly by a painter's brush, two vivid spots appeared in
the girl's pale cheeks. She shrank back from him another step. Her eyes
blazed. Slowly, without turning their flame from his face, she pointed
to the edge of the shrubbery a few feet from where they were standing.
He looked. Twisted and partly coiled on the mold, where it had been
clubbed to death, was a little green grass snake.

"I hate him--like that!" she said.

His eyes came back to her. "Then for some reason known only to you and
Shan Tung you have sold or are intending to sell yourself to him!"

It was not a question. It was an accusation. He saw the flush of anger
fading out of her cheeks. Her body relaxed, her head dropped, and
slowly she nodded in confirmation.

"Yes, I am going to sell myself to him."

The astounding confession held him mute for a space. In the interval it
was the girl who became self-possessed. What she said next amazed him
still more.

"I have confessed so much because I am positive that you will not
betray me. And I went up to the Shack to find you, because I want you
to help me find a story to tell McDowell. You said you would help me.
Will you?"

He still did not speak, and she went on.

"I am accepting that promise as granted, too. McDowell mistrusts, but
he must not know. You must help me there. You must help me for two or
three weeks, At the end of that time something may happen. He must be
made to have faith in me again. Do you understand?"

"Partly," said Keith. "You ask me to do this blindly, without knowing
why I am doing it, without any explanation whatever on your part except
that for some unknown and mysterious price you are going to sell
yourself to Shan Tung. You want me to cover and abet this monstrous
deal by hoodwinking the man whose suspicions threaten its consummation.
If there was not in my own mind a suspicion that you are insane, I
should say your proposition is as ludicrous as it is impossible. Having
that suspicion, it is a bit tragic. Also it is impossible. It is
necessary for you first to tell me why you are going to sell yourself
to Shan Tung."

Her face was coldly white and calm again. But her hands trembled. He
saw her try to hide them, and pitied her.

"Then I won't trouble you any more, for that, too, is impossible," she
said. "May I trust you to keep in confidence what I have told you?
Perhaps I have had too much faith in you for a reason which has no
reason, because you were with John Keith. John Keith was the one other
man who might have helped me."

"And why John Keith? How could he have helped you?"

She shook her head. "If I told you that, I should be answering the
question which is impossible."

He saw himself facing a checkmate. To plead, to argue with her, he knew
would profit him nothing. A new thought came to him, swift and
imperative. The end would justify the means. He clenched his hands. He
forced into his face a look that was black and vengeful. And he turned
it on her.

"Listen to me," he cried. "You are playing a game, and so am I.
Possibly we are selfish, both of us, looking each to his own interests
with no thought of the other. Will you help me, if I help you?"

Again he pitied her as he saw with what eager swiftness she caught at
his bait.

"Yes," she nodded, catching her breath. "Yes, I will help you."

His face grew blacker. He raised his clenched hands so she could see
them, and advanced a step toward her.

"Then tell me this--would you care if something happened to Shan Tung?
Would you care if he died, if he was killed, if--"

Her breath was coming faster and faster. Again the red spots blazed in
her cheeks.

"WOULD YOU CARE?" he demanded.

"No--no--I wouldn't care. He deserves to die."

"Then tell me where Shan Tung is. For my game is with him. And I
believe it is a bigger game than your game, for it is a game of life
and death. That is why I am interested in your affair. It is because I
am selfish, because I have my own score to settle, and because you can
help me. I shall ask you no more questions about yourself. And I shall
keep your secret and help you with McDowell if you will keep mine and
help me. First, where is Shan Tung?"

She hesitated for barely an instant. "He has gone out of town. He will
be away for ten days."

"But he bought no ticket; no one saw him leave by train."

"No, he walked up the river. An auto was waiting for him. He will pass
through tonight on the eastbound train on his way to Winnipeg."

"Will you tell me why he is going to Winnipeg?"

"No, I cannot."

He shrugged his shoulders. "It is scarcely necessary to ask. I can
guess. It is to see your brother."

Again he knew he had struck home.

And yet she said, "No, it is not to see my brother."

He held out his hand to her. "Miss Kirkstone, I am going to keep my
promise. I am going to help you with McDowell. Of course I demand my
price. Will you swear on your word of honor to let me know the moment
Shan Tung returns?"

"I will let you know."

Their hands clasped. Looking into her eyes, Keith saw what told him his
was not the greatest cross to bear. Miriam Kirkstone also was fighting
for her life, and as he turned to leave her, he said:

"While there is life there is hope. In settling my score with Shan Tung
I believe that I shall also settle yours. It is a strong hunch, Miss
Kirkstone, and it's holding me tight. Ten days, Shan Tung, and then--"

He left her, smiling. Miriam Kirkstone watched him go, her slim hands
clutched at her breast, her eyes aglow with a new thought, a new hope;
and as he heard the gate slam behind him, a sobbing cry rose in her
throat, and she reached out her hands as if to call him back, for
something was telling her that through this man lay the way to her
salvation.

And her lips were moaning softly, "Ten days--ten days--and then--what?"




XIX


In those ten days all the wonders of June came up out of the south.
Life pulsed with a new and vibrant force. The crimson fire-flowers,
first of wild blooms to come after snow and frost, splashed the green
spaces with red. The forests took on new colors, the blue of the sky
grew nearer, and in men's veins the blood ran with new vigor and
anticipations. To Keith they were all this and more. Four years along
the rim of the Arctic had made it possible for him to drink to the full
the glory of early summer along the Saskatchewan. And to Mary Josephine
it was all new. Never had she seen a summer like this that was dawning,
that most wonderful of all the summers in the world, which comes in
June along the southern edge of the Northland.

Keith had played his promised part. It was not difficult for him to
wipe away the worst of McDowell's suspicions regarding Miss Kirkstone,
for McDowell was eager to believe. When Keith told him that Miriam was
on the verge of a nervous breakdown simply because of certain trouble
into which Shan Tung had inveigled her brother, and that everything
would be straightened out the moment Shan Tung returned from Winnipeg,
the iron man seized his hands in a sudden burst of relief and gratitude.

"But why didn't she confide in me, Conniston?" he complained. "Why
didn't she confide in me?" The anxiety in his voice, its note of
disappointment, were almost boyish.

Keith was prepared. "Because--"

He hesitated, as if projecting the thing in his mind. "McDowell, I'm in
a delicate position. You must understand without forcing me to say too
much. You are the last man in the world Miss Kirkstone wants to know
about her trouble until she has triumphed, and it is over. Delicacy,
perhaps; a woman's desire to keep something she is ashamed of from the
one man she looks up to above all other men--to keep it away from him
until she has cleared herself so that there is no suspicion. McDowell,
if I were you, I'd be proud of her for that."

McDowell turned away, and for a space Keith saw the muscles in the back
of his neck twitching.

"Derwent, maybe you've guessed, maybe you understand," he said after a
moment with his face still turned to the window. "Of course she will
never know. I'm too Old, old enough to be her father. But I've got the
right to watch over her, and if any man ever injures her--"

His fists grew knotted, and softly Keith said behind him:

"You'd possibly do what John Keith did to the man who wronged his
father. And because the Law is not always omniscient, it is also
possible that Shan Tung may have to answer in some such way. Until
then, until she comes to you of her own free will and with gladness in
her eyes tells you her own secret and why she kept it from you--until
she does that, I say, it is your part to treat her as if you had seen
nothing, guessed nothing, suspected nothing. Do that, McDowell, and
leave the rest to me."

He went out, leaving the iron man still with his face to the window.

With Mary Josephine there was no subterfuge. His mind was still
centered in his own happiness. He could not wipe out of his brain the
conviction that if he waited for Shan Tung he was waiting just so long
under the sword of Damocles, with a hair between him and doom. He hoped
that Miriam Kirkstone's refusal to confide in him and her reluctance to
furnish him with the smallest facts in the matter would turn Mary
Josephine's sympathy into a feeling of indifference if not of actual
resentment. He was disappointed. Mary Josephine insisted on having Miss
Kirkstone over for dinner the next day, and from that hour something
grew between the two girls which Keith knew he was powerless to
overcome. Thereafter he bowed his head to fate. He must wait for Shan
Tung.

"If it wasn't for your promise not to fall in love, I'd be afraid,"
Mary Josephine confided to him that night, perched on the arm of his
big chair. "At times I was afraid today, Derry. She's lovely. And you
like pretty hair--and hers--is wonderful!"

"I don't remember," said Keith quietly, "that I promised you I wouldn't
fall in love. I'm desperately in love, and with you, Mary Josephine.
And as for Miss Kirkstone's lovely hair--I wouldn't trade one of yours
for all she has on her head."

At that, with a riotous little laugh of joy, Mary Josephine swiftly
unbound her hair and let it smother about his face and shoulders.
"Sometimes I have a terribly funny thought, Derry," she whispered. "If
we hadn't always been sweethearts, back there at home, and if you
hadn't always liked my hair, and kissed me, and told me I was pretty,
I'd almost think you weren't my brother!"

Keith laughed and was glad that her hair covered his face. During those
wonderful first days of the summer they were inseparable, except when
matters of business took Keith away. During these times he prepared for
eventualities. The Keith properties in Prince Albert, he estimated,
were worth at least a hundred thousand dollars, and he learned from
McDowell that they would soon go through a process of law before being
turned over to his fortunate inheritors. Before that time, however, he
knew that his own fate would be sealed one way or the other, and now
that he had Mary Josephine to look after, he made a will, leaving
everything to her, and signing himself John Keith. This will he carried
in an envelope pinned inside his shirt. As Derwent Conniston he
collected one thousand two hundred and sixty dollars for three and a
half years back wage in the Service. Two hundred and sixty of this he
kept in his own pocket. The remaining thousand he counted out in new
hundred-dollar bills under Mary Josephine's eyes, sealed the bills in
another envelope, and gave the envelope to her.

"It's safer with you than with me," he excused himself. "Fasten it
inside your dress. It's our grub-stake into the mountains."

Mary Josephine accepted the treasure with the repressed delight of one
upon whose fair shoulders had been placed a tremendous responsibility.

There were days of both joy and pain for Keith. For even in the fullest
hours of his happiness there was a thing eating at his heart, a thing
that was eating deeper and deeper until at times it was like a
destroying flame within him. One night he dreamed; he dreamed that
Conniston came to his bedside and wakened him, and that after wakening
him he taunted him in ghoulish glee and told him that in bequeathing
him a sister he had given unto him forever and forever the curse of the
daughters of Achelous. And Keith, waking in the dark hour of night,
knew in his despair that it was so. For all time, even though he won
this fight he was fighting, Mary Josephine would be the unattainable. A
sister--and he loved her with the love of a man!

It was the next day after the dream that they wandered again into the
grove that sheltered Keith's old home, and again they entered it and
went through the cold and empty rooms. In one of these rooms he sought
among the titles of dusty rows of books until he came to one and opened
it. And there he found what had been in the corner of his mind when the
sun rose to give him courage after the night of his dream. The
daughters of Achelous had lost in the end. Ulysses had tricked them.
Ulysses had won. And in this day and age it was up to him, John Keith,
to win, and win he would!

Always he felt this mastering certainty of the future when alone with
Mary Josephine in the open day. With her at his side, her hand in his,
and his arm about her waist, he told himself that all life was a
lie--that there was no earth, no sun, no song or gladness in all the
world, if that world held no hope for him. It was there. It was beyond
the rim of forest. It was beyond the yellow plains, beyond the farthest
timber of the farthest prairie, beyond the foothills; in the heart of
the mountains was its abiding place. As he had dreamed of those
mountains in boyhood and youth, so now he dreamed his dreams over again
with Mary Josephine. For her he painted his pictures of them, as they
wandered mile after mile up the shore of the Saskatchewan--the little
world they would make all for themselves, how they would live, what
they would do, the mysteries they would seek out, the triumphs they
would achieve, the glory of that world--just for two. And Mary
Josephine planned and dreamed with him.

In a week they lived what might have been encompassed in a year. So it
seemed to Keith, who had known her only so long. With Mary Josephine
the view-point was different. There had been a long separation, a
separation filled with a heartbreak which she would never forget, but
it had not served to weaken the bonds between her and this loved one,
who, she thought, had always been her own. To her their comradeship was
more complete now than it ever had been, even back in the old days, for
they were alone in a land that was strange to her, and one was all that
the world held for the other. So her possessorship of Keith was a thing
which--again in the dark and brooding hours of night--sometimes made
him writhe in an agony of shame. Hers was a shameless love, a love
which had not even the lover's reason for embarrassment, a love
unreserved and open as the day. It was her trick, nights, to nestle
herself in the big armchair with him, and it was her fun to smother his
face in her hair and tumble it about him, piling it over his mouth and
nose until she made him plead for air. Again she would fit herself
comfortably in the hollow of his arm and sit the evening out with her
head on his shoulder, while they planned their future, and twice in
that week she fell asleep there. Each morning she greeted him with a
kiss, and each night she came to him to be kissed, and when it was her
pleasure she kissed him--or made him kiss her--when they were on their
long walks. It was bitter-sweet to Keith, and more frequently came the
hours of crushing desolation for him, those hours in the still, dark
night when his hypocrisy and his crime stood out stark and hideous in
his troubled brain.

As this thing grew in him, a black and foreboding thunderstorm on the
horizon of his dreams, an impulse which he did not resist dragged him
more and more frequently down to the old home, and Mary Josephine was
always with him. They let no one know of these visits. And they talked
about John Keith, and in Mary Josephine's eyes he saw more than once a
soft and starry glow of understanding. She loved the memory of this man
because he, her brother, had loved him. And after these hours came the
nights when truth, smiling at him, flung aside its mask and stood a
grinning specter, and he measured to the depths the falseness of his
triumph. His comfort was the thought that she knew. Whatever happened,
she would know what John Keith had been. For he, John Keith, had told
her. So much of the truth had he lived.

He fought against the new strain that was descending upon him slowly
and steadily as the days passed. He could not but see the new light
that had grown in Miriam Kirkstone's eyes. At times it was more than a
dawn of hope. It was almost certainty. She had faith in him, faith in
his promise to her, in his power to fight, his strength to win. Her
growing friendship with Mary Josephine accentuated this, inspiring her
at times almost to a point of conviction, for Mary Josephine's
confidence in him was a passion. Even McDowell, primarily a fighter of
his own battles, cautious and suspicious, had faith in him while he
waited for Shan Tung. It was this blind belief in him that depressed
him more than all else, for he knew that victory for himself must be
based more or less on deceit and treachery. For the first time he heard
Miriam laugh with Mary Josephine; he saw the gold and the brown head
together out in the sun; he saw her face shining with a light that he
had never seen there before, and then, when he came upon them, their
faces were turned to him, and his heart bled even as he smiled and held
out his hands to Mary Josephine. They trusted him, and he was a liar, a
hypocrite, a Pharisee.

On the ninth day he had finished supper with Mary Josephine when the
telephone rang. He rose to answer it. It was Miriam Kirkstone.

"He has returned," she said.

That was all. The words were in a choking voice. He answered and hung
up the receiver. He knew a change had come into his face when he turned
to Mary Josephine. He steeled himself to a composure that drew a
questioning tenseness into her face. Gently he stroked her soft hair,
explaining that Shan Tung had returned and that he was going to see
him. In his bedroom he strapped his Service automatic under his coat.

At the door, ready to go, he paused. Mary Josephine came to him and put
her hands to his shoulders. A strange unrest was in her eyes, a
question which she did not ask.

Something whispered to him that it was the last time. Whatever happened
now, tonight must leave him clean. His arms went around her, he drew
her close against his breast, and for a space he held her there,
looking into her eyes.

"You love me?" he asked softly.

"More than anything else in the world," she whispered.

"Kiss me, Mary Josephine."

Her lips pressed to his.

He released her from his arms, slowly, lingeringly.

After that she stood in the lighted doorway, watching him, until he
disappeared in the gloom of the slope. She called good-by, and he
answered her. The door closed.

And he went down into the valley, a hand of foreboding gripping at his
heart.




XX


With a face out of which all color had fled, and eyes filled with the
ghosts of a new horror, Miriam Kirkstone stood before Keith in the big
room in the house on the hill.

"He was here--ten minutes," she said, and her voice was as if she was
forcing it out of a part of her that was dead and cold. It was
lifeless, emotionless, a living voice and yet strange with the chill of
death. "In those ten minutes he told me--that! If you fail--"

It was her throat that held him, fascinated him. White, slim,
beautiful--her heart seemed pulsing there. And he could see that heart
choke back the words she was about to speak.

"If I fail--" he repeated the words slowly after her, watching that
white, beating throat.

"There is only the one thing left for me to do. You--you--understand?"

"Yes, I understand. Therefore I shall not fail."

He backed away from her toward the door, and still he could not take
his eyes from the white throat with its beating heart. "I shall not
fail," he repeated. "And when the telephone rings, you will be here--to
answer?"

"Yes, here," she replied huskily.

He went out. Under his feet the gravelly path ran through a flood of
moonlight. Over him the sky was agleam with stars. It was a white
night, one of those wonderful gold-white nights in the land of the
Saskatchewan. Under that sky the world was alive. The little city lay
in a golden glimmer of lights. Out of it rose a murmur, a rippling
stream of sound, the voice of its life, softened by the little valley
between. Into it Keith descended. He passed men and women, laughing,
talking, gay. He heard music. The main street was a moving throng. On a
corner the Salvation Army, a young woman, a young man, a crippled boy,
two young girls, and an old man, were singing "Nearer, My God, to
Thee." Opposite the Board of Trade building on the edge of the river a
street medicine-fakir had drawn a crowd to his wagon. To the beat of
the Salvation Army's tambourine rose the thrum of a made-up negro's
banjo.

Through these things Keith passed, his eyes open, his ears listening,
but he passed swiftly. What he saw and what he heard pressed upon him
with the chilling thrill of that last swan-song, the swan-song of Ecla,
of Kobat, of Ty, who had heard their doom chanted from the
mountain-tops. It was the city rising up about his cars in rejoicing
and triumph. And it put in his heart a cold, impassive anger. He sensed
an impending doom, and yet he was not afraid. He was no longer chained
by dreams, no more restrained by self. Before his eyes, beating,
beating, beating, he saw that tremulous heart in Miriam Kirkstone's
soft, white throat.

He came to Shan Tung's. Beyond the softly curtained windows it was a
yellow glare of light. He entered and met the flow of life, the murmur
of voices and laughter, the tinkle of glasses, the scent of cigarette
smoke, and the fainter perfume of incense. And where he had seen him
last, as though he had not moved since that hour nine days ago, still
with his cigarette, still sphinx-like, narrow-eyed, watchful, stood Li
King.

Keith walked straight to him. And this time, as he approached, Li King
greeted him with a quick and subtle smile. He nipped his cigarette to
the tiled floor. He was bowing, gracious. Tonight he was not stupid.

"I have come to see Shan Tung," said Keith.

He had half expected to be refused, in which event he was prepared to
use his prerogative as an officer of the law to gain his point. But Li
King did not hesitate. He was almost eager. And Keith knew that Shan
Tung was expecting him.

They passed behind one of the screens and then behind another, until it
seemed to Keith their way was a sinuous twisting among screens. They
paused before a panel in the wall, and Li King pressed the black throat
of a long-legged, swan-necked bird with huge wings and the panel opened
and swung toward them. It was dark inside, but Li King turned on a
light. Through a narrow hallway ten feet in length he led the way,
unlocked a second door, and held it open, smiling at Keith.

"Up there," he said.

A flight of steps led upward and as Keith began to mount them the door
closed softly behind him. Li King accompanied him no further.

He mounted the steps, treading softly. At the top was another door, and
this he opened as quietly as Li King had closed the one below him.
Again the omnipresent screens, and then his eyes looked out upon a
scene which made him pause in astonishment. It was a great room, a room
fifty feet long by thirty in width, and never before had he beheld such
luxury as it contained. His feet sank into velvet carpets, the walls
were hung richly with the golds and browns and crimsons of priceless
tapestries, and carven tables and divans of deep plush and oriental
chairs filled the space before him. At the far end was a raised dais,
and before this, illumined in candleglow, was a kneeling figure. He
noticed then that there were many candles burning, that the room was
lighted by candles, and that in their illumination the figure did not
move. He caught the glint of armors standing up, warrior like, against
the tapestries, and he wondered for a moment if the kneeling figure was
a heathen god made of wood. It was then that he smelled the odor of
frankincense; it crept subtly into his nostrils and his mouth,
sweetened his breath, and made him cough.

At the far end, before the dais, the kneeling figure began to move. Its
arms extended slowly, they swept backward, then out again, and three
times the figure bowed itself and straightened, and with the movement
came a low, human monotone. It was over quickly. Probably two full
minutes had not passed since Keith had entered when the kneeling figure
sprang to its feet with the quickness of a cat, faced about, and stood
there, smiling and bowing and extending its hand.

"Good evening, John Keith!" It was Shan Tung. An oriental gown fell
about him, draping him like a woman. It was a crimson gown, grotesquely
ornamented with embroidered peacocks, and it flowed and swept about him
in graceful undulations as he advanced, his footfalls making not the
sound of a mouse on the velvet floors.

"Good evening, John Keith!" He was close, smiling, his eyes glowing,
his hand still outstretched, friendliness in his voice and manner. And
yet in that voice there was a purr, the purr of a cat watching its
prey, and in his eyes a glow that was the soft rejoicing of a triumph.

Keith did not take the hand. He made as if he did not see it. He was
looking into those glowing, confident eyes of the Chinaman. A Chinaman!
Was it possible? Could a Chinaman possess that voice, whose very
perfection shamed him?

Shan Tung seemed to read his thoughts. And what he found amused him,
and he bowed again, still smiling. "I am Shan Tung," he said with the
slightest inflection of irony. "Here--in my home--I am different. Do
you not recognize me?"

He waved gracefully a hand toward a table on either side of which was a
chair. He seated himself, not waiting for Keith. Keith sat down
opposite him. Again he must have read what was in Keith's heart, the
desire and the intent to kill, for suddenly he clapped his hands, not
loudly, once--twice--

"You will join me in tea?" he asked.

Scarcely had he spoken when about them, on all sides of them it seemed
to Keith, there was a rustle of life. He saw tapestries move. Before
his eyes a panel became a door. There was a clicking, a stir as of
gowns, soft footsteps, a movement in the air. Out of the panel doorway
came a Chinaman with a cloth, napkins, and chinaware. Behind him
followed a second with tea-urn and a bowl, and with the suddenness of
an apparition, without sound or movement, a third was standing at
Keith's side. And still there was rustling behind, still there was the
whispering beat of life, and Keith knew that there were others. He did
not flinch, but smiled back at Shan Tung. A minute, no more, and the
soft-footed yellow men had performed their errands and were gone.

"Quick service," he acknowledged. "VERY quick service. Shan Tung! But I
have my hand on something that is quicker!"

Suddenly Shan Tung leaned over the table. "John Keith, you are a fool
if you came here with murder in your heart," he said. "Let us be
friends. It is best. Let us be friends."




XXI


It was as if with a swiftness invisible to the eye a mask had dropped
from Shan Tung's face. Keith, preparing to fight, urging himself on to
the step which he believed he must take, was amazed. Shan Tung was
earnest. There was more than earnestness in his eyes, an anxiety, a
frankly revealed hope that Keith would meet him halfway. But he did not
offer his hand again. He seemed to sense, in that instant, the vast
gulf between yellow and white. He felt Keith's contempt, the spurning
contumely that was in the other's mind. Under the pallid texture of his
skin there began to burn a slow and growing flush.

"Wait!" he said softly. In his flowing gown he seemed to glide to a
carven desk near at hand. He was back in a moment with a roll of
parchment in his hand. He sat down again and met Keith's eyes squarely
and in silence for a moment.

"We are both MEN, John Keith." His voice was soft and calm. His
tapering fingers with their carefully manicured nails fondled the roll
of parchment, and then unrolled it, and held it so the other could read.

It was a university diploma. Keith stared. A strange name was scrolled
upon it, Kao Lung, Prince of Shantung. His mind leaped to the truth. He
looked at the other.

The man he had known as Shan Tung met his eyes with a quiet, strange
smile, a smile in which there was pride, a flash of sovereignty, of a
thing greater than skins that were white. "I am Prince Kao," he said.
"That is my diploma. I am a graduate of Yale."

Keith's effort to speak was merely a grunt. He could find no words. And
Kao, rolling up the parchment and forgetting the urn of tea that was
growing cold, leaned a little over the table again. And then it was,
deep in his narrowed, smoldering eyes, that Keith saw a devil, a
living, burning thing of passion, Kao's soul itself. And Kao's voice
was quiet, deadly.

"I recognized you in McDowell's office," he said. "I saw, first, that
you were not Derwent Conniston. And then it was easy, so easy. Perhaps
you killed Conniston. I am not asking, for I hated Conniston. Some day
I should have killed him, if he had come back. John Keith, from that
first time we met, you were a dead man. Why didn't I turn you over to
the hangman? Why did I warn you in such a way that I knew you would
come to see me? Why did I save your life which was in the hollow of my
hand? Can you guess?"

"Partly," replied Keith. "But go on. I am waiting." Not for an instant
had it enter his mind to deny that he was John Keith. Denial was folly,
a waste of time, and just now he felt that nothing in the world was
more precious to him than time.

Kao's quick mind, scheming and treacherous though it was, caught his
view-point, and he nodded appreciatively. "Good, John Keith. It is
easily guessed. Your life is mine. I can save it. I can destroy it. And
you, in turn, can be of service to me. You help me, and I save you. It
is a profitable arrangement. And we both are happy, for you keep
Derwent Conniston's sister--and I--I get my golden-headed goddess,
Miriam Kirkstone!"

"That much I have guessed," said Keith. "Go on!" For a moment Kao
seemed to hesitate, to study the cold, gray passiveness of the other's
face. "You love Derwent Conniston's sister," he continued in a voice
still lower and softer. "And I--I love my golden-headed goddess. See!
Up there on the dais I have her picture and a tress of her golden hair,
and I worship them."

Colder and grayer was Keith's face as he saw the slumbering passion
burn fiercer in Kao's eyes. It turned him sick. It was a terrible thing
which could not be called love. It was a madness. But Kao, the man
himself, was not mad. He was a monster. And while the eyes burned like
two devils, his voice was still soft and low.

"I know what you are thinking; I see what you are seeing," he said.
"You are thinking yellow, and you are seeing yellow. My skin! My
birthright! My--" He smiled, and his voice was almost caressing.

"John Keith, in Pe-Chi-Li is the great city of Pekin, and Pe-Chi-Li is
the greatest province in all China. And second only to that is the
province of Shantung, which borders Pe-Chi-Li, the home of our Emperors
for more centuries than you have years. And for so many generations
that we cannot remember my forefathers have been rulers of Shantung. My
grandfather was a Mandarin with the insignia of the Eighth Order, and
my father was Ninth and highest of all Orders, with his palace at
Tsi-Nan, on the Yellow Sea. And I, Prince Kao, eldest of his sons, came
to America to learn American law and American ways. And I learned them,
John Keith. I returned, and with my knowledge I undermined a
government. For a time I was in power, and then this thing you call the
god of luck turned against me, and I fled for my life. But the blood is
still here--" he put his hand softly to his breast, "--the blood of a
hundred generations of rulers. I tell you this because you dare not
betray me, you dare not tell them who I am, though even that truth
could not harm me. I prefer to be known as Shan Tung. Only you--and
Miriam Kirkstone--have heard as much."

Keith's blood was like fire, but his voice was cold as ice. "GO ON!"

This time there could be no mistake. That cold gray of his passionless
face, the steely glitter in his eyes, were read correctly by Kao. His
eyes narrowed. For the first time a dull flame leaped into his
colorless cheeks.

"Ah, I told you this because I thought we would work together,
friends," he cried. "But it is not so. You, like my golden-headed
goddess, hate me! You hate me because of my yellow skin. You say to
yourself that I have a yellow heart. And she hates me, and she says
that--but she is mine, MINE!" He sprang suddenly to his feet and swept
about him with his flowing arms. "See what I have prepared for her! It
is here she will come, here she will live until I take her away. There,
on that dais, she will give up her soul and her beautiful body to
me--and you cannot help it, she cannot help it, all the world cannot
help it--AND SHE IS COMING TO ME TONIGHT!"

"TONIGHT!" gasped John Keith.

He, too, leaped to his feet. His face was ghastly. And Kao, in his
silken gown, was sweeping his arms about him.

"See! The candles are lighted for her. They are waiting. And tonight,
when the town is asleep, she will come. AND IT IS YOU WHO WILL MAKE HER
COME, JOHN KEITH!"

Facing the devils in Kao's eyes, within striking distance of a creature
who was no longer a man but a monster, Keith marveled at the coolness
that held him back.

"Yes, it is you who will at last give her soul and her beautiful body
to me," he repeated. "Come. I will show you how--and why!"

He glided toward the dais. His hand touched a panel. It opened and in
the opening he turned about and waited for Keith.

"Come!" he said.

Keith, drawing a deep breath, his soul ready for the shock, his body
ready for action, followed him.




XXII


Into a narrow corridor, through a second door that seemed made of
padded wool, and then into a dimly lighted room John Keith followed
Kao, the Chinaman. Out of this room there was no other exit; it was
almost square, its ceiling was low, its walls darkly somber, and that
life was there Keith knew by the heaviness of cigarette smoke in the
air. For a moment his eyes did not discern the physical evidence of
that life. And then, staring at him out of the yellow glow, he saw a
face. It was a haunting, terrible face, a face heavy and deeply lined
by sagging flesh and with eyes sunken and staring. They were more than
staring. They greeted Keith like living coals. Under the face was a
human form, a big, fat, sagging form that leaned outward from its seat
in a chair.

Kao, bowing, sweeping his flowing raiment with his arms, said, "John
Keith, allow me to introduce you to Peter Kirkstone."

For the first time amazement, shock, came to Keith's lips in an audible
cry. He advanced a step. Yes, in that pitiable wreck of a man he
recognized Peter Kirkstone, the fat creature who had stood under the
picture of the Madonna that fateful night, Miriam Kirkstone's brother!

And as he stood, speechless, Kao said: "Peter Kirkstone, you know why I
have brought this man to you tonight. You know that he is not Derwent
Conniston. You know that he is John Keith, the murderer of your father.
Is it not so?"

The thick lips moved. The voice was husky--"Yes."

"He does not believe. So I have brought him that he may listen to you.
Peter Kirkstone, is it your desire that your sister, Miriam, give
herself to me, Prince Kao, tonight?"

Again the thick lips moved. This time Keith saw the effort. He
shuddered. He knew these questions and answers had been prepared. A
doomed man was speaking.

And the voice came, choking, "Yes."

"WHY?"

The terrible face of Peter Kirkstone seemed to contort. He looked at
Kao. And Kao's eyes were shining in that dull room like the eyes of a
snake.

"Because--it will save my life."

"And why will it save your life?"

Again that pause, again the sickly, choking effort. "Because--I HAVE
KILLED A MAN."

Bowing, smiling, rustling, Kao turned to the door. "That is all, Peter
Kirkstone. Good night. John Keith, will you follow me?"

Dumbly Keith followed through the dark corridor, into the big room
mellow with candle-glow, back to the table with its mocking tea-urn and
chinaware. He felt a thing like clammy sweat on his back. He sat down.
And Kao sat opposite him again.

"That is the reason, John Keith. Peter Kirkstone, her brother, is a
murderer, a cold-blooded murderer. And only Miriam Kirkstone and your
humble servant, Prince Kao, know his secret. And to buy my secret, to
save his life, the golden-headed goddess is almost ready to give
herself to me--almost, John Keith. She will decide tonight, when you go
to her. She will come. Yes, she will come tonight. I do not fear. I
have prepared for her the candles, the bridal dais, the nuptial supper.
Oh, she will come. For if she does not, if she fails, with tomorrow's
dawn Peter Kirkstone and John Keith both go to the hangman!"

Keith, in spite of the horror that had come over him, felt no
excitement. The whole situation was clear to him now, and there was
nothing to be gained by argument, no possibility of evasion. Kao held
the winning hand, the hand that put him back to the wall in the face of
impossible alternatives. These alternatives flashed upon him swiftly.
There were two and only two--flight, and alone, without Mary Josephine;
and betrayal of Miriam Kirkstone. Just how Kao schemed that he should
accomplish that betrayal, he could not guess.

His voice, like his face, was cold and strange when it answered the
Chinaman; it lacked passion; there was no emphasis, no inflection that
gave to one word more than to another. And Keith, listening to his own
voice, knew what it meant. He was cold inside, cold as ice, and his
eyes were on the dais, the sacrificial altar that Kao had prepared,
waiting in the candleglow. On the floor of that dais was a great splash
of dull-gold altar cloth, and it made him think of Miriam Kirkstone's
unbound and disheveled hair strewn in its outraged glory over the thing
Kao had prepared for her.

"I see. It is a trade, Kao. You are offering me my life in return for
Miriam Kirkstone."

"More than that, John Keith. Mine is the small price. And yet it is
great to me, for it gives me the golden goddess. But is she more to me
than Derwent Conniston's sister may be to you? Yes, I am giving you
her, and I am giving you your life, and I am giving Peter Kirkstone his
life--all for ONE."

"For one," repeated Keith.

"Yes, for one."

"And I, John Keith, in some mysterious way unknown to me at present, am
to deliver Miriam Kirkstone to you?"

"Yes."

"And yet, if I should kill you, now--where you sit--"

Kao shrugged his slim shoulders, and Keith heard that soft, gurgling
laugh that McDowell had said was like the splutter of oil.

"I have arranged. It is all in writing. If anything should happen to
me, there are messengers who would carry it swiftly. To harm me would
be to seal your own doom. Besides, you would not leave here alive. I am
not afraid."

"How am I to deliver Miriam Kirkstone to you?"

Kao leaned forward, his fingers interlacing eagerly. "Ah, NOW you have
asked the question, John Keith! And we shall be friends, great friends,
for you see with the eyes of wisdom. It will be easy, so easy that you
will wonder at the cheapness of the task. Ten days ago Miriam Kirkstone
was about to pay my price. And then you came. From that moment she saw
you in McDowell's office, there was a sudden change. Why? I don't know.
Perhaps because of that thing you call intuition but to which we give a
greater name. Perhaps only because you were the man who had run down
her father's murderer. I saw her that afternoon, before you went up at
night. Ah, yes, I could see, I could understand the spark that had
begun to grow in her, hope, a wild, impossible hope, and I prepared for
it by leaving you my message. I went away. I knew that in a few days
all that hope would be centered in you, that it would live and die in
you, that in the end it would be your word that would bring her to me.
And that word you must speak tonight. You must go to her, hope-broken.
You must tell her that no power on earth can save her, and that Kao
waits to make her a princess, that tomorrow will be too late, that
TONIGHT must the bargain be closed. She will come. She will save her
brother from the hangman, and you, in bringing her, will save John
Keith and keep Derwent Conniston's sister. Is it not a great reward for
the little I am asking?"

It was Keith who now smiled into the eyes of the Chinaman, but it was a
smile that did not soften that gray and rock-like hardness that had
settled in his face. "Kao, you are a devil. I suppose that is a
compliment to your dirty ears. You're rotten to the core of the thing
that beats in you like a heart; you're a yellow snake from the skin in.
I came to see you because I thought there might be a way out of this
mess. I had almost made up my mind to kill you. But I won't do that.
There's a better way. In half an hour I'll be with McDowell, and I'll
beat you out by telling him that I'm John Keith. And I'll tell him this
story of Miriam Kirkstone from beginning to end. I'll tell him of that
dais you've built for her--your sacrificial altar!--and tomorrow Prince
Albert will rise to a man to drag you out of this hole and kill you as
they would kill a rat. That is my answer, you slit-eyed, Yale-veneered
yellow devil! I may die, and Peter Kirkstone may die, but you'll not
get Miriam Kirkstone!"

He was on his feet when he finished, amazed at the calmness of his own
voice, amazed that his hands were steady and his brain was cool in this
hour of his sacrifice. And Kao was stunned. Before his eyes he saw a
white man throwing away his life. Here, in the final play, was a
master-stroke he had not foreseen. A moment before the victor, he was
now the vanquished. About him he saw his world falling, his power gone,
his own life suddenly hanging by a thread. In Keith's face he read the
truth. This white man was not bluffing. He would go to McDowell. He
would tell the truth. This man who had ventured so much for his own
life and freedom would now sacrifice that life to save a girl, one
girl! He could not understand, and yet he believed. For it was there
before his eyes in that gray, passionless face that was as inexorable
as the face of one of his own stone gods.

As he uttered the words that smashed all that Kao had planned for,
Keith sensed rather than saw the swift change of emotion sweeping
through the yellow-visaged Moloch staring up at him. For a space the
oriental's evil eyes had widened, exposing wider rims of saffron white,
betraying his amazement, the shock of Keith's unexpected revolt, and
then the lids closed slowly, until only dark and menacing gleams of
fire shot between them, and Keith thought of the eyes of a snake. Swift
as the strike of a rattler Kao was on his feet, his gown thrown back,
one clawing hand jerking a derringer from his silken belt. In the same
breath he raised his voice in a sharp call.

Keith sprang back. The snake-like threat in the Chinaman's eyes had
prepared him, and his Service automatic leaped from its holster with
lightning swiftness. Yet that movement was no swifter than the response
to Kao's cry. The panel shot open, the screens moved, tapestries
billowed suddenly as if moved by the wind, and Kao's servants sprang
forth and were at him like a pack of dogs. Keith had no time to judge
their number, for his brain was centered in the race with Kao's
derringer. He saw its silver mountings flash in the candle-glow, saw
its spurt of smoke and fire. But its report was drowned in the roar of
his automatic as it replied with a stream of lead and flame. He saw the
derringer fall and Kao crumple up like a jackknife. His brain turned
red as he swung his weapon on the others, and as he fired, he backed
toward the door. Then something caught him from behind, twisting his
head almost from his shoulders, and he went down.

He lost his automatic. Weight of bodies was upon him; yellow hands
clutched for his throat; he felt hot breaths and heard throaty cries. A
madness of horror possessed him, a horror that was like the blind
madness of Laocoon struggling with his sons in the coils of the giant
serpent. In these moments he was not fighting men. They were monsters,
yellow, foul-smelling, unhuman, and he fought as Laocoon fought. As if
it had been a cane, he snapped the bone of an arm whose hand was
throttling him; he twisted back a head until it snapped between its
shoulders; he struck and broke with a blind fury and a giant strength,
until at last, torn and covered with blood, he leaped free and reached
the door. As he opened it and sprang through, he had the visual
impression that only two of his assailants were rising from the floor.

For the space of a second he hesitated in the little hallway. Down the
stairs was light--and people. He knew that he was bleeding and his
clothes were torn, and that flight in that direction was impossible. At
the opposite end of the hall was a curtain which he judged must cover a
window. With a swift movement he tore down this curtain and found that
he was right. In another second he had crashed the window outward with
his shoulder, and felt the cool air of the night in his face. The door
behind him was still closed when he crawled out upon a narrow landing
at the top of a flight of steps leading down into the alley. He paused
long enough to convince himself that his enemies were making no effort
to follow him, and as he went down the steps, he caught himself grimly
chuckling. He had given them enough.

In the darkness of the alley he paused again. A cool breeze fanned his
cheeks, and the effect of it was to free him of the horror that had
gripped him in his fight with the yellow men. Again the calmness with
which he had faced Kao possessed him. The Chinaman was dead. He was
sure of that. And for him there was not a minute to lose.

After all, it was his fate. The game had been played, and he had lost.
There was one thing left undone, one play Conniston would still make,
if he were there. And he, too, would make it. It was no longer
necessary for him to give himself up to McDowell, for Kao was dead, and
Miriam Kirkstone was saved. It was still right and just for him to
fight for his life. But Mary Josephine must know FROM HIM. It was the
last square play he could make.

No one saw him as he made his way through alleys to the outskirts of
the town. A quarter of an hour later he came up the slope to the Shack.
It was lighted, and the curtains were raised to brighten his way up the
hill. Mary Josephine was waiting for him.

Again there came over him the strange and deadly calmness with which he
had met the tragedy of that night. He had tried to wipe the blood from
his face, but it was still there when he entered and faced Mary
Josephine. The wounds made by the razor-like nails of his assailants
were bleeding; he was hatless, his hair was disheveled, and his throat
and a part of his chest were bare where his clothes had been torn away.
As Mary Josephine came toward him, her arms reaching out to him, her
face dead white, he stretched out a restraining hand, and said,

"Please wait, Mary Josephine!"

Something stopped her--the strangeness of his voice, the terrible
hardness of his face, gray and blood-stained, the something appalling
and commanding in the way he had spoken. He passed her quickly on his
way to the telephone. Her lips moved; she tried to speak; one of her
hands went to her throat. He was calling Miriam Kirkstone's number! And
now she saw that his hands, too, were bleeding. There came the murmur
of a voice in the telephone. Someone answered. And then she heard him
say,

"SHAN TUNG IS DEAD!"

That was all. He hung up the receiver and turned toward her. With a
little cry she moved toward him.

"DERRY--DERRY--"

He evaded her and pointed to the big chair in front of the fireplace.
"Sit down, Mary Josephine."

She obeyed him. Her face was whiter than he had thought a living face
could be, And then, from the beginning to the end, he told her
everything. Mary Josephine made no sound, and in the big chair she
seemed to crumple smaller and smaller as he confessed the great lie to
her, from the hour Conniston and he had traded identities in the little
cabin on the Barren. Until he died he knew she would haunt him as he
saw her there for the last time--her dead-white face, her great eyes,
her voiceless lips, her two little hands clutched at her breast as she
listened to the story of the great lie and his love for her.

Even when he had done, she did not move or speak. He went into his
room, closed the door, and turned on the lights. Quickly he put into
his pack what he needed. And when he was ready, he wrote on a piece of
paper:


"A thousand times I repeat, 'I love you.' Forgive me if you can. If you
cannot forgive, you may tell McDowell, and the Law will find me up at
the place of our dreams--the river's end.

    --John Keith."


This last message he left on the table for Mary Josephine.

For a moment he listened at the door. Outside there was no movement, no
sound. Quietly, then, he raised the window through which Kao had come
into his room.

A moment later he stood under the light of the brilliant stars. Faintly
there came to him the sounds of the city, the sound of life, of gayety,
of laughter and of happiness, rising to him now from out of the valley.

He faced the north. Down the side of the hill and over the valley lay
the forests. And through the starlight he strode back to them once
more, back to their cloisters and their heritage, the heritage of the
hunted and the outcast.




XXIII


All through the starlit hours of that night John Keith trudged steadily
into the Northwest. For a long time his direction took him through
slashings, second-growth timber, and cleared lands; he followed rough
roads and worn trails and passed cabins that were dark and without life
in the silence of midnight. Twice a dog caught the stranger scent in
the air and howled; once he heard a man's voice, far away, raised in a
shout. Then the trails grew rougher. He came to a deep wide swamp. He
remembered that swamp, and before he plunged into it, he struck a match
to look at his compass and his watch. It took him two hours to make the
other side. He was in the deep and uncut timber then, and a sense of
relief swept over him.

The forest was again his only friend. He did not rest. His brain and
his body demanded the action of steady progress, though it was not
through fear of what lay behind him. Fear had ceased to be a
stimulating part of him; it was even dead within him. It was as if his
energy was engaged in fighting for a principle, and the principle was
his life; he was following a duty, and this duty impelled him to make
his greatest effort. He saw clearly what he had done and what was ahead
of him. He was twice a killer of men now, and each time the killing had
rid the earth of a snake. This last time it had been an exceedingly
good job. Even McDowell would concede that, and Miriam Kirkstone, on
her knees, would thank God for what he had done. But Canadian law did
not split hairs like its big neighbor on the south. It wanted him at
least for Kirkstone's killing if not for that of Kao, the Chinaman. No
one, not even Mary Josephine, would ever fully realize what he had
sacrificed for the daughter of the man who had ruined his father. For
Mary Josephine would never understand how deeply he had loved her.

It surprised him to find how naturally he fell back into his old habit
of discussing things with himself, and how completely and calmly he
accepted the fact that his home-coming had been but a brief and
wonderful interlude to his fugitivism. He did not know it at first, but
this calmness was the calmness of a despair more fatal than the menace
of the hangman.

"They won't catch me," he encouraged himself. "And she won't tell them
where I'm going. No, she won't do that." He found himself repeating
that thought over and over again. Mary Josephine would not betray him.
He repeated it, not as a conviction, but to fight back and hold down
another thought that persisted in forcing itself upon him. And this
thing, that at times was like a voice within him, cried out in its
moments of life, "She hates you--and she WILL tell where you are going!"

With each hour it was harder for him to keep that voice down; it
persisted, it grew stronger; in its intervals of triumph it rose over
and submerged all other thoughts in him. It was not his fear of her
betrayal that stabbed him; it was the underlying motive of it, the
hatred that would inspire it. He tried not to vision her as he had seen
her last, in the big chair, crushed, shamed, outraged--seeing in him no
longer the beloved brother, but an impostor, a criminal, a man whom she
might suspect of killing that brother for his name and his place in
life. But the thing forced itself on him. It was reasonable, and it was
justice.

"But she won't do it," he told himself. "She won't do it."

This was his fight, and its winning meant more to him than freedom. It
was Mary Josephine who would live with him now, and not Conniston. It
was her spirit that would abide with him, her voice he would hear in
the whispers of the night, her face he would see in the glow of his
lonely fires, and she must remain with him always as the Mary Josephine
he had known. So he crushed back the whispering voice, beat it down
with his hands clenched at his side, fought it through the hours of
that night with the desperation of one who fights for a thing greater
than life.

Toward dawn the stars began to fade out of the sky. He had been
tireless, and he was tireless now. He felt no exhaustion. Through the
gray gloom that came before day he went on, and the first glow of sun
found him still traveling. Prince Albert and the Saskatchewan were
thirty miles to the south and east of him.

He stopped at last on the edge of a little lake and unburdened himself
of his pack for the first time. He was glad that the premonition of
just such a sudden flight as this had urged him to fill his emergency
grub-sack yesterday morning. "Won't do any harm for us to be prepared,"
he had laughed jokingly to Mary Josephine, and Mary Josephine herself
had made him double the portion of bacon because she was fond of it. It
was hard for him to slice that bacon without a lump rising in his
throat. Pork and love! He wanted to laugh, and he wanted to cry, and
between the two it was a queer, half-choked sound that came to his
lips. He ate a good breakfast, rested for a couple of hours, and went
on. At a more leisurely pace he traveled through most of the day, and
at night he camped. In the ten days following his flight from Prince
Albert he kept utterly out of sight. He avoided trappers' shacks and
trails and occasional Indians. He rid himself of his beard and shaved
himself every other day. Mary Josephine had never cared much for the
beard. It prickled. She had wanted him smooth-faced, and now he was
that. He looked better, too. But the most striking resemblance to
Derwent Conniston was gone. At the end of the ten days he was at Turtle
Lake, fifty miles east of Fort Pitt. He believed that he could show
himself openly now, and on the tenth day bartered with some Indians for
fresh supplies. Then he struck south of Fort Pitt, crossed the
Saskatchewan, and hit between the Blackfoot Hills and the Vermillion
River into the Buffalo Coulee country. In the open country he came upon
occasional ranches, and at one of these he purchased a pack-horse. At
Buffalo Lake he bought his supplies for the mountains, including fifty
steel traps, crossed the upper branch of the Canadian Pacific at night,
and the next day saw in the far distance the purple haze of the Rockies.

It was six weeks after the night in Kao's place that he struck the
Saskatchewan again above the Brazeau. He did not hurry now. Just ahead
of him slumbered the mountains; very close was the place of his dreams.
But he was no longer impelled by the mighty lure of the years that were
gone. Day by day something had worn away that lure, as the ceaseless
grind of water wears away rock, and for two weeks he wandered slowly
and without purpose in the green valleys that lay under the snow-tipped
peaks of the ranges. He was gripped in the agony of an unutterable
loneliness, which fell upon and scourged him like a disease. It was a
deeper and more bitter thing than a yearning for companionship. He
might have found that. Twice he was near camps. Three times he saw
outfits coming out, and purposely drew away from them. He had no desire
to meet men, no desire to talk or to be troubled by talking. Day And
night his body and his soul cried out for Mary Josephine, and in his
despair he cursed those who had taken her away from him. It was a
crisis which was bound to come, and in his aloneness he fought it out.
Day after day he fought it, until his face and his heart bore the scars
of it. It was as if a being on whom he had set all his worship had
died, only it was worse than death. Dead, Mary Josephine would still
have been his inspiration; in a way she would have belonged to him. But
living, hating him as she must, his dreams of her were a sacrilege and
his love for her like the cut of a sword. In the end he was like a man
who had triumphed over a malady that would always leave its marks upon
him. In the beginning of the third week he knew that he had conquered,
just as he had triumphed in a similar way over death and despair in the
north. He would go into the mountains, as he had planned. He would
build his cabin. And if the Law came to get him, it was possible that
again he would fight.

On the second day of this third week he saw advancing toward him a
solitary horseman. The stranger was possibly a mile away when he
discovered him, and he was coming straight down the flat of the valley.
That he was not accompanied by a pack-horse surprised Keith, for he was
bound out of the mountains and not in. Then it occurred to him that he
might be a prospector whose supplies were exhausted, and that he was
easing his journey by using his pack as a mount. Whoever and whatever
he was, Keith was not in any humor to meet him, and without attempting
to conceal himself he swung away from the river, as if to climb the
slope of the mountain on his right. No sooner had he clearly signified
the new direction he was taking, than the stranger deliberately altered
his course in a way to cut him off. Keith was irritated. Climbing up a
narrow terrace of shale, he headed straight up the slope, as if his
intention were to reach the higher terraces of the mountain, and then
he swung suddenly down into a coulee, where he was out of sight. Here
he waited for ten minutes, then struck deliberately and openly back
into the valley. He chuckled when he saw how cleverly his ruse had
worked. The stranger was a quarter of a mile up the mountain and still
climbing.

"Now what the devil is he taking all that trouble for?" Keith asked
himself.

An instant later the stranger saw him again. For perhaps a minute he
halted, and in that minute Keith fancied he was getting a round
cursing. Then the stranger headed for him, and this time there was no
escape, for the moment he struck the shelving slope of the valley, he
prodded his horse into a canter, swiftly diminishing the distance
between them. Keith unbuttoned the flap of his pistol holster and
maneuvered so that he would be partly concealed by his pack when the
horseman rode up. The persistence of the stranger suggested to him that
Mary Josephine had lost no time in telling McDowell where the law would
be most likely to find him.

Then he looked over the neck of his pack at the horseman, who was quite
near, and was convinced that he was not an officer. He was still
jogging at a canter and riding atrociously. One leg was napping as if
it had lost its stirrup-hold; the rider's arms were pumping, and his
hat was sailing behind at the end of a string.

"Whoa!" said Keith.

His heart stopped its action. He was staring at a big red beard and a
huge, shaggy head. The horseman reined in, floundered from his saddle,
and swayed forward as if seasick.

"Well, I'll be--"

"DUGGAN!"

"JOHNNY--JOHNNY KEITH!"




XXIV


For a matter of ten seconds neither of the two men moved. Keith was
stunned. Andy Duggan's eyes were fairly popping out from under his
bushy brows. And then unmistakably Keith caught the scent of bacon in
the air.

"Andy--Andy Duggan," he choked. "You know me--you know Johnny
Keith--you know me--you--"

Duggan answered with an inarticulate bellow and jumped at Keith as if
to bear him to the ground. He hugged him, and Keith hugged, and then
for a minute they stood pumping hands until their faces were red, and
Duggan was growling over and over:

"An' you passed me there at McCoffin's Bend--an' I didn't know you, I
didn't know you, I didn't know you! I thought you was that cussed
Conniston! I did. I thought you was Conniston!" He stood back at last.
"Johnny--Johnny Keith!"

"Andy, you blessed old devil!"

They pumped hands again, pounded shoulders until they were sore, and in
Keith's face blazed once more the love of life.

Suddenly old Duggan grew rigid and sniffed the air. "I smell bacon!"

"It's in the pack, Andy. But for Heaven's sake don't notice the bacon
until you explain how you happen to be here."

"Been waitin' for you," replied Duggan in an affectionate growl. "Knew
you'd have to come down this valley to hit the Little Fork. Been
waitin' six weeks."

Keith dug his fingers into Duggan's arm.

"How did you know I was coming HERE?" he demanded. "Who told you?"

"All come out in the wash, Johnny. Pretty mess. Chinaman dead. Johnny
Keith, alias Conniston, alive an' living with Conniston's pretty
sister. Johnny gone--skipped. No one knew where. I made guesses. Knew
the girl would know if anyone did. I went to her, told her how you'n me
had been pals, an' she give me the idee you was goin' up to the river's
end. I resigned from the Betty M., that night. Told her, though, that
she was a ninny if she thought you'd go up there. Made her believe the
note was just a blind."

"My God," breathed Keith hopelessly, "I meant it."

"Sure you did, Johnny. I knew it. But I didn't dare let HER know it. If
you could ha' seen that pretty mouth o' hern curlin' up as if she'd
liked to have bit open your throat, an' her hands clenched, an' that
murder in her eyes--Man, I lied to her then! I told her I was after
you, an' that if she wouldn't put the police on you, I'd bring back
your head to her, as they used to do in the old times. An' she bit.
Yes, sir, she said to me, 'If you'll do that, I won't say a word to the
police!' An' here I am, Johnny. An' if I keep my word with that little
tiger, I've got to shoot you right now. Haw! Haw!"

Keith had turned his face away.

Duggan, pulling him about by the shoulders, opened his eyes wide in
amazement.--"Johnny--"

"Maybe you don't understand, Andy," struggled Keith. "I'm sorry--she
feels--like that."

For a moment Duggan was silent. Then he exploded with a sudden curse.
"SORRY! What the devil you sorry for, Johnny? You treated her square,
an' you left her almost all of Conniston's money. She ain't no kick
comin', and she ain't no reason for feelin' like she does. Let 'er go
to the devil, I say. She's pretty an' sweet an' all that--but when
anybody wants to go clawin' your heart out, don't be fool enough to
feel sorry about it. You lied to her, but what's that? There's bigger
lies than yourn been told, Johnny, a whole sight bigger! Don't you go
worryin'. I've been here waitin' six weeks, an' I've done a lot of
thinkin', and all our plans are set an' hatched. An' I've got the
nicest cabin all built and waitin' for us up the Little Fork. Here we
are. Let's be joyful, son!" He laughed into Keith's tense, gray face.
"Let's be joyful!"

Keith forced a grin. Duggan didn't know. He hadn't guessed what that
"little tiger who would have liked to have bit open his throat" had
been to him. The thick-headed old hero, loyal to the bottom of his
soul, hadn't guessed. And it came to Keith then that he would never
tell him. He would keep that secret. He would bury it in his burned-out
soul, and he would be "joyful" if he could. Duggan's blazing, happy
face, half buried in its great beard, was like the inspiration and
cheer of a sun rising on a dark world. He was not alone. Duggan, the
old Duggan of years ago, the Duggan who had planned and dreamed with
him, his best friend, was with him now, and the light came back into
his face as he looked toward the mountains. Off there, only a few miles
distant, was the Little Fork, winding into the heart of the Rockies,
seeking out its hidden valleys, its trailless canons, its hidden
mysteries. Life lay ahead of him, life with its thrill and adventure,
and at his side was the friend of all friends to seek it with him. He
thrust out his hands.

"God bless you, Andy," he cried. "You're the gamest pal that ever
lived!"

A moment later Duggan pointed to a clump of timber half a mile ahead.
"It's past dinner-time," he said. "There's wood. If you've got any
bacon aboard, I move we eat."

An hour later Andy was demonstrating that his appetite was as voracious
as ever. Before describing more of his own activities, he insisted that
Keith recite his adventures from the night "he killed that old skunk,
Kirkstone."

It was two o'clock when they resumed their journey. An hour later they
struck the Little Fork and until seven traveled up the stream. They
were deep in the lap of the mountains when they camped for the night.
After supper, smoking his pipe, Duggan stretched himself out
comfortably with his back to a tree.

"Good thing you come along when you did, Johnny," he said. "I been
waitin' in that valley ten days, an' the eats was about gone when you
hove in sight. Meant to hike back to the cabin for supplies tomorrow or
next day. Gawd, ain't this the life! An' we're goin' to find gold,
Johnny, we're goin' to find it!"

"We've got all our lives to--to find it in," said Keith.

Duggan puffed out a huge cloud of smoke and heaved a great sigh of
pleasure. Then he grunted and chuckled. "Lord, what a little firebrand
that sister of Conniston's is!" he exclaimed. "Johnny, I bet if you'd
walk in on her now, she'd kill you with her own hands. Don't see why
she hates you so, just because you tried to save your life. Of course
you must ha' lied like the devil. Couldn't help it. But a lie ain't
nothin'. I've told some whoppers, an' no one ain't never wanted to kill
me for it. I ain't afraid of McDowell. Everyone said the Chink was a
good riddance. It's the girl. There won't be a minute all her life she
ain't thinkin' of you, an' she won't be satisfied until she's got you.
That is, she thinks she won't. But we'll fool the little devil, Johnny.
We'll keep our eyes open--an' fool her!"

"Let's talk of pleasanter things," said Keith. "I've got fifty traps in
the pack, Andy. You remember how we used to plan on trapping during the
winter and hunting for gold during the summer?"

Duggan rubbed his hands until they made a rasping sound; he talked of
lynx signs he had seen, and of marten and fox. He had panned "colors"
at a dozen places along the Little Fork and was ready to make his
affidavit that it was the same gold he had dredged at McCoffin's Bend.

"If we don't find it this fall, we'll be sittin' on the mother lode
next summer," he declared, and from then until it was time to turn in
he talked of nothing but the yellow treasure it had been his lifelong
dream to find. At the last, when they had rolled in their blankets, he
raised himself on his elbow for a moment and said to Keith:

"Johnny, don't you worry about that Conniston girl. I forgot to tell
you I've took time by the forelock. Two weeks ago I wrote an' told her
I'd learned you was hittin' into the Great Slave country, an' that I
was about to hike after you. So go to sleep an' don't worry about that
pesky little rattlesnake."

"I'm not worrying," said Keith.

Fifteen minutes later he heard Duggan snoring. Quietly he unwrapped his
blanket and sat up. There were still burning embers in the fire, the
night--like that first night of his flight--was a glory of stars, and
the moon was rising. Their camp was in a small, meadowy pocket in the
center of which was a shimmering little lake across which he could
easily have thrown a stone. On the far side of this was the sheer wall
of a mountain, and the top of this wall, thousands of feet up, caught
the glow of the moon first. Without awakening his comrade, Keith walked
to the lake. He watched the golden illumination as it fell swiftly
lower over the face of the mountain. He could see it move like a great
flood. And then, suddenly, his shadow shot out ahead of him, and he
turned to find the moon itself glowing like a monstrous ball between
the low shoulders of a mountain to the east. The world about him became
all at once vividly and wildly beautiful. It was as if a curtain had
lifted so swiftly the eye could not follow it. Every tree and shrub and
rock stood out in a mellow spotlight; the lake was transformed to a
pool of molten silver, and as far as he could see, where shoulders and
ridges did not cut him out, the moonlight was playing on the mountains.
In the air was a soft droning like low music, and from a distant crag
came the rattle of loosened rocks. He fancied, for a moment, that Mary
Josephine was standing at his side, and that together they were
drinking in the wonder of this dream at last come true. Then a cry came
to his lips, a broken, gasping man-cry which he could not keep back,
and his heart was filled with anguish.

With all its beauty, all its splendor of quiet and peace, the night was
a bitter one for Keith, the bitterest of his life. He had not believed
the worst of Mary Josephine. He knew he had lost her and that she might
despise him, but that she would actually hate him with the desire for a
personal vengeance he had not believed. Was Duggan right? Was Mary
Josephine unfair? And should he in self-defense fight to poison his own
thoughts against her? His face set hard, and a joyless laugh fell from
his lips. He knew that he was facing the inevitable. No matter what had
happened, he must go on loving Mary Josephine.

All through that night he was awake. Half a dozen times he went to his
blanket, but it was impossible for him to sleep. At four o'clock he
built up the fire and at five roused Duggan. The old river-man sprang
up with the enthusiasm of a boy. He came back from the lake with his
beard and head dripping and his face glowing. All the mountains held no
cheerier comrade than Duggan.

They were on the trail at six o'clock and hour after hour kept steadily
up the Little Fork. The trail grew rougher, narrower, and more
difficult to follow, and at intervals Duggan halted to make sure of the
way. At one of these times he said to Keith:

"Las' night proved there ain't no danger from her, Johnny. I had a
dream, an' dreams goes by contraries an' always have. What you dream
never comes true. It's always the opposite. An' I dreamed that little
she-devil come up on you when you was asleep, took a big bread-knife,
an' cut your head plumb off! Yessir, I could see her holdin' up that
head o' yourn, an' the blood was drippin', an' she was a-laughin'--"

"SHUT UP!" Keith fairly yelled the words. His eyes blazed. His face was
dead white.

With a shrug of his huge shoulders and a sullen grunt Duggan went on.

An hour later the trail narrowed into a short canon, and this canon, to
Keith's surprise, opened suddenly into a beautiful valley, a narrow
oasis of green hugged in between the two ranges. Scarcely had they
entered it, when Duggan raised his voice in a series of wild yells and
began firing his rifle into the air.

"Home-coming," he explained to Keith, after he was done. "Cabin's just
over that bulge. Be there in ten minutes."

In less than ten minutes Keith saw it, sheltered in the edge of a thick
growth of cedar and spruce from which its timbers had been taken. It
was a larger cabin than he had expected to see--twice, three times as
large.

"How did you do it alone!" he exclaimed in admiration. "It's a wonder,
Andy. Big enough for--for a whole family!"

"Half a dozen Indians happened along, an' I hired 'em," explained
Duggan. "Thought I might as well make it big enough, Johnny, seein' I
had plenty of help. Sometimes I snore pretty loud, an'--"

"There's smoke coming out of it," cried Keith.

"Kept one of the Indians," chuckled Duggan. "Fine cook, an' a
sassy-lookin' little squaw she is, Johnny. Her husband died last
winter, an' she jumped at the chance to stay, for her board an' five
bucks a month. How's your Uncle Andy for a schemer, eh, Johnny?"

A dozen rods from the cabin was a creek. Duggan halted here to water
his horse and nodded for Keith to go on.

"Take a look, Johnny; go ahead an' take a look! I'm sort of sot up over
that cabin."

Keith handed his reins to Duggan and obeyed. The cabin door was open,
and he entered. One look assured him that Duggan had good reason to be
"sot up." The first big room reminded him of the Shack. Beyond that was
another room in which he heard someone moving and the crackle of a fire
in a stove. Outside Duggan was whistling. He broke off whistling to
sing, and as Keith listened to the river-man's bellowing voice chanting
the words of the song he had sung at McCoffin's Bend for twenty years,
he grinned. And then he heard the humming of a voice in the kitchen.
Even the squaw was happy.

And then--and then--

"GREAT GOD IN HEAVEN--"

In the doorway she stood, her arms reaching out to him, love, glory,
triumph in her face--MARY JOSEPHINE!

He swayed; he groped out; something blinded him--tears--hot, blinding
tears that choked him, that came with a sob in his throat. And then she
was in his arms, and her arms were around him, and she was laughing and
crying, and he heard her say: "Why--why didn't you come back--to
me--that night? Why--why did you--go out--through the--window? I--I was
waiting--and I--I'd have gone--with you--"

From the door behind them came Duggan's voice, chuckling, exultant,
booming with triumph. "Johnny, didn't I tell you there was lots bigger
lies than yourn? Didn't I? Eh?"




XXV


It was many minutes, after Keith's arms had closed around Mary
Josephine, before he released her enough to hold her out and look at
her. She was there, every bit of her, eyes glowing with a greater glory
and her face wildly aflush with a thing that had never been there
before; and suddenly, as he devoured her in that hungry look, she gave
a little cry, and hugged herself to his breast, and hid her face there.

And he was whispering again and again, as though he could find no other
word,

"Mary--Mary--Mary--"

Duggan drew away from the door. The two had paid no attention to his
voice, and the old river-man was one continuous chuckle as he unpacked
Keith's horse and attended to his own, hobbling them both and tying
cow-bells to them. It was half an hour before he ventured up out of the
grove along the creek and approached the cabin again. Even then he
halted, fussing with a piece of harness, until he saw Mary Josephine in
the door. The sun was shining on her. Her glorious hair was down, and
behind her was Keith, so close that his shoulders were covered with it.
Like a bird Mary Josephine sped to Duggan. Great red beard and all she
hugged him, and on the flaming red of his bare cheek-bone she kissed
him.

"Gosh," said Duggan, at a loss for something better to say. "Gosh--"

Then Keith had him by the hand. "Andy, you ripsnorting old liar, if you
weren't old enough to be my father, I'd whale the daylights out of
you!" he cried joyously. "I would, just because I love you so! You've
made this day the--the--the--"

"--The most memorable of my life," helped Mary Josephine. "Is that
it--John?"

Timidly, for the first time, her cheek against his shoulder, she spoke
his name. And before Duggan's eyes Keith kissed her.

Hours later, in a world aglow with the light of stars and a radiant
moon, Keith and Mary Josephine were alone out in the heart of their
little valley. To Keith it was last night returned, only more
wonderful. There was the same droning song in the still air, the low
rippling of running water, the mysterious whisperings of the mountains.
All about them were the guardian peaks of the snow-capped ranges, and
under their feet was the soft lush of grass and the sweet scent of
flowers. "Our valley of dreams," Mary Josephine had named it, an
infinite happiness trembling in her voice. "Our beautiful valley of
dreams--come true!" "And you would have come with me--that night?"
asked Keith wonderingly. "That night--I ran away?"

"Yes. I didn't hear you go. And at last I went to your door and
listened, and then I knocked, and after that I called to you, and when
you didn't answer, I entered your room."

"Dear heaven!" breathed Keith. "After all that, you would have come
away with me, covered with blood, a--a murderer, they say--a hunted
man--"

"John, dear." She took one of his hands in both her own and held it
tight. "John, dear, I've got something to tell you."

He was silent.

"I made Duggan promise not to tell you I was here when he found you,
and I made him promise something else--to keep a secret I wanted to
tell you myself. It was wonderful of him. I don't see how he did it."

She snuggled still closer to him, and held his hand a little tighter.
"You see, John, there was a terrible time after you killed Shan Tung.
Only a little while after you had gone, I saw the sky growing red. It
was Shan Tung's place--afire. I was terrified, and my heart was broken,
and I didn't move. I must have sat at the window a long time, when the
door burst open suddenly and Miriam ran in, and behind her came
McDowell. Oh, I never heard a man swear as McDowell swore when he found
you had gone, and Miriam flung herself on the floor at my feet and
buried her head in my lap.

"McDowell tramped up and down, and at last he turned to me as if he was
going to eat me, and he fairly shouted, 'Do you know--THAT CURSED FOOL
DIDN'T KILL JUDGE KIRKSTONE!'"

There was a pause in which Keith's brain reeled. And Mary Josephine
went on, as quietly as though she were talking about that evening's
sunset:

"Of course, I knew all along, from what you had told me about John
Keith, that he wasn't what you would call a murderer. You see, John, I
had learned to LOVE John Keith. It was the other thing that horrified
me! In the fight, that night, Judge Kirkstone wasn't badly hurt, just
stunned. Peter Kirkstone and his father were always quarreling. Peter
wanted money, and his father wouldn't give it to him. It seems
impossible,--what happened then. But it's true. After you were gone,
PETER KIRKSTONE KILLED HIS FATHER THAT HE MIGHT INHERIT THE ESTATE! And
then he laid the crime on you!"

"My God!" breathed Keith. "Mary--Mary Josephine--how do you know?"

"Peter Kirkstone was terribly burned in the fire. He died that night,
and before he died he confessed. That was the power Shan Tung held over
Miriam. He knew. And Miriam was to pay the price that would save her
brother from the hangman."

"And that," whispered Keith, as if to himself, "was why she was so
interested in John Keith."

He looked away into the shimmering distance of the night, and for a
long time both were silent. A woman had found happiness. A man's soul
had come out of darkness into light.




THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The River's End, by James Oliver Curwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RIVER'S END ***

***** This file should be named 4747.txt or 4747.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/4/4747/

Produced by Dianne Bean.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
