The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Christmas Hamper, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Christmas Hamper
       A Volume of Pictures and Stories for Little Folks

Author: Various

Release Date: October 17, 2016 [EBook #53299]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTMAS HAMPER ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy, Susan Theresa Morin and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Books
project.)





See Transcriber’s Notes at end of text.




[Illustration:

    This Christmas hamper, neat and trim,
    Is full of sweet things to the brim!
    Its tales and rhymes, and pictures bright,
    Will please you, dear, on Christmas night,
    When of such games as blind-man’s-buff
    And hide-and-seek you’ve had enough.]





[Illustration: A CARRIAGE AND PAIR.]

[Illustration]


a Christmas Hamper

A Volume of Pictures and Stories
for Little Folks


T. NELSON & SONS
LONDON, EDINBURGH &
NEW YORK

[Illustration]




CONTENTS


   A Very Naughty Little Person.

   Poor Uncle Tom.

   A Snow Man.

   Not Such Fun as it Seemed.

   On the Sands.

   Old Clothes.

   The Little Tiny Thing.

   Questions.
     Answers.

   A Lesson in Manners.

   The Prize Boat.

   The Little Thief in the Pantry.

   Great-Grandmother’s Wish.




[Illustration]




A Very Naughty Little Person.

[Illustration]

    I’M told I’m very naughty—
      I almost ’spect I am;
    But, somehow, when I shut the door
      It’s nearly sure to slam.

    Can you tell why my shoe-strings break
      And tie themselves in knots,
    And how it is my copy-books
      Are always full of blots?

    It seems as if too many blots
      Lived in one pot of ink;
    But when they’re wet and shiny,
      They’re pretty, don’t you think?

    Why does my hair get tangled?
      What makes me talk all day?
    And why don’t toys and books just try
      To put themselves away?

    I think that p’r’aps I _might_ be good
      A little, by-and-by;
    It’s very hard, but sometimes
      I _almost_ ’spect I’ll try.

    But now they say I’m naughty,
      And p’r’aps it’s nearly true;
    There are so many naughty things
      For little folks to do.




Poor Uncle Tom.

[Illustration]


HE seemed a funny old gentleman, the children thought, but still rather
nice, especially when he brought those sweets out of his pocket and
let them dip into the bag and take what they liked. They had seen him
walking through the wood, and then when they left off playing, he had
come to sit down beside them, and asked them their names.

“Mine’s Hugh, like father,” said the eldest; “and this is Lily, and
this is Tom.”

The old gentleman looked a little quickly at Tom.

“Who is he named after?” he said.

The children’s faces grew grave.

“He is named after poor Uncle Tom,” said Lily in a low voice, “who went
to sea and was drowned.”

There was silence for a minute. Then the old gentleman spoke again,—

“So poor Uncle Tom was drowned, was he?”

“Yes,” said Hugh. “His ship was lost, and everybody was drowned, ’cept
two or three that got in the boat, and Uncle Tom wasn’t among them.
Father waited and waited, but it wasn’t any good. So then he put up a
monument in the church just where we can see it from our pew.”

“And we always sings about the saints of God on his burfday,” said
Lily, “and father cries a little.”

[Illustration]

“No, he don’t!” said Hugh indignantly. “Father’s a man, and men don’t
cry!”

“But he does,” said Lily. “I saw a weeny little tear on his cheek this
morning, for to-day is Uncle Tom’s burfday, and his voice goes all
shaky like, ’cause he was so fond of poor Uncle Tom, and says he was so
good.”

The old gentleman sat silent, staring hard at the ground.

“Is it long since Uncle Tom went away?” he said at last.

“It is ten years,” replied Hugh. “It was the year I was born.”

“Ten years—so it is,” murmured the old gentleman—“only ten years, and
it has seemed like a hundred.”

The children looked at one another surprised.

“Did you ever know Uncle Tom?” asked Hugh curiously.

“Yes, I knew him well. I was on his ship.”

“But you aren’t drowned!” cried Lily.

The old gentleman smiled.

“No,” he said, “I wasn’t drowned; I got off safe. Uncle Tom used to
talk to me, though, about his old home, and one day he said that he had
carved his name on a tree in the park, and I was to go and see it if I
ever got home.”

“Oh, I’ll show you,” said little Tom. “It is on a beech tree close by
here. I’ll show you. There it is.”

He pointed to a tree on which some initials and a date were cut deep
into the bark.

“It has kept very fresh,” said the old gentleman. “I thought it would
have been grown over by now.”

“Father always comes and tidies it up on uncle’s birthday,” said
the boy. “See, he is coming now! I’ll go and tell him you are
here.—Father!” he shouted, running off—“father, here’s a gentleman who
knew Uncle Tom!”

But when father came near and saw the old gentleman, he stared at him
for a moment as if he had seen a ghost, and then he gave a great cry.

“Tom, Tom, it is you yourself!”

And it _was_ Uncle Tom, who had not been drowned after all, but when
the ship was wrecked had managed to get ashore to an island, and there
had lived on the fish he caught, and birds’ eggs, and cocoa-nuts,
watching for a sail, like Robinson Crusoe. At last the sail came after
ten long years. And when he reached England he did not write, but came
down to his old home to see who was there, for of course he had heard
no tidings all the time.

Nobody recognized him at the village, for the tropical sun had burned
his skin brown, and the long waiting and the sorrow and the hardships
had turned his hair white. Only his brother knew him by his eyes, for
they two had loved each other very much.

“But what will father do with your tombstone?” said Lily gravely, as
she sat on her uncle’s knee that night. “It is such a pretty one, with
a beautiful angel on it!”

[Illustration]




A Snow Man.

[Illustration]


        OH, the beautiful snow!
        We’re all in a glow—
    Nell, Dolly, and Willie, and Dan;
        For the primest of fun,
        When all’s said and done,
    Is just making a big snow man.

        Two stones for his eyes
        Look quite owlishly wise,
    A hard pinch of snow for his nose;
        Then a mouth that’s as big
        As the snout of a pig,
    And he’ll want an old pipe, I suppose.

        Then the snow man is done,
        And to-morrow what fun
    To make piles of snow cannon all day,
        And to pelt him with balls
        Till he totters and falls,
    And a thaw comes and melts him away.

[Illustration: FINISHING TOUCHES.]




Not Such Fun as it Seemed.

[Illustration]


“ISN’T it fun, Dolly?” asked Eric, as he and his little sister ran
along the sea front as fast as their sturdy legs could carry them.

Eric was the jolliest little boy imaginable, but, unfortunately, a
little bit too fond of mischief, and Dolly was generally only too eager
to join in her brother’s pranks.

Just now they were running away from nurse, who was down on the sands
with baby. They waited until her head was turned away, then off they
ran.

“We’ll go out to the rocks and play at being shipwrecked sailors,” Eric
went on. “I’ve got some biscuits in my pocket, and I’ll dole them out,
piece by piece, and pretend we shan’t have any more food unless a boat
takes us off.”

[Illustration]

Poor Eric! his play very soon became earnest, for he and Dolly waded
out to a big rock in a very lonely part of the coast, and so interested
were they in their game that they never noticed the tide coming in
until it had surrounded them, and there was no getting back.

[Illustration: ALONG THE SEA FRONT.]

They waited on and on, hoping some one would come for them, and fearing
every moment that the sea would cover the rock, and that they would be
drowned.

It was long past dinner-time, and they were wet through and hungry and
wretched when at last a fisherman, who had been sent out to search for
them, spied the two forlorn little figures, and rescued them.

They went home hand in hand, very solemn and silent, expecting to get a
good scolding; but instead of that, mother burst into tears of relief,
and both Eric and Dolly felt so thoroughly ashamed of themselves for
having frightened their darling mother so terribly that it was a very
long, long time before they got into mischief again.

[Illustration]




On The Sands.

[Illustration]


    THE sun is shining brightly,
    The seagulls floating lightly,
      And the sea is calling, “Children,
      Won’t you come and play with me?”
    So ask for breakfast early,
    While the waves are crisp and curly,
      And come with us to paddle,
      Paddle gaily in the sea.




Old Clothes.

[Illustration]


THE sunniest of days, the clearest and loveliest of blue seas, and I, a
little lobster, young, proud, and as lively as a cricket—that is what
people say; but I can’t help thinking “as lively as a shrimp” would
sound better.

I always wear a lovely suit of armour, like those old warriors you read
about. It is strong and firm and well jointed, so that I can move ever
so fast—of course not so fast as that silly little fish.

He has armour too, he says, but wears it _inside_. That seems queer to
me; I can’t quite believe it.

But I want to tell you what a queer thing happened to mine not long
ago. _It grew small and shabby_, like your last year’s dress; that is
why I have called this story “Old Clothes.”

Listen. I lived a very happy life out at sea for some time, till one
day I fell into a strange basket-box thing.

There were several other lobsters and one or two crabs sitting there,
looking anxious and disturbed. And I soon found out that they had need
to feel so, for there was no _exit_. That means “way out” in plain
words.

Our basket was joined to a strong rope, and that was attached to a cork
floating on the top of the water.

Not long after I had fallen into this basket, which I now know was a
lobster-trap, a boat rowed out from the shore, stopped just above us,
and then we were lifted up, up, right out of the water, and placed in
the boat.

The next thing was a good deal of pushing and knocking about, and then
some one tossed me carelessly out on the beach, saying roughly, “Too
small for any use.”

But some one else thought differently. Another hand touched me, and
another voice said, “Just the thing for my aquarium.”

[Illustration: THE LITTLE CAPTIVE.]

What that meant I could not even guess; but it turned out to be the
tiniest sea in the world. Steady old limpets, red anemones, hermit
crabs, and shrimps were all there.

It was a very nice home, with plenty of good food, the only drawback
being want of space.

And now the event happened that I promised to tell you about.

My armour took to hurting me. You will hardly believe me. We all know
that _new_ clothes hurt sometimes, but _old_ ones!

It grew tighter and tighter. I wriggled about, feeling miserable. Oh,
if only I could get out of this!

At last I grew desperate. This choked, tight feeling was too much. I
gave a tremendous struggle, and shook myself; crickle, crackle went my
old armour, off it came, and out I stepped.

But, oh, so tender, and so nervous! The shrimps pranced round and
knocked up against me, pricking and tormenting till I could have
screamed.

I crept behind a stone and looked at my old armour half sadly. It
looked just like old me, only so still, and rather as if I had been out
in the rain all night and had shrunk.

Then I glanced at the new me. Well, I was a pretty fellow—not
blue-black any longer, but a reddish pink of lovely hue.

Some one else took pride in my appearance, for I heard again a voice
say, “Look at my lobster; he has cast his shell.”

I hadn’t, you know—it was the shell that had cast me; but these men
can’t know _everything_.

The man touched me, but he hurt me almost as much as the shrimps, and I
shrank farther still behind the stone out of his way. There I quietly
lay for some days, till one morning, feeling braver and ever so much
bigger, I stepped out for an early saunter.

That moment came a voice, “Oh, here is my lobster! How he has grown,
more than half as big again!” Down came the hand as before; and just to
show him I was also half as _strong_ again, I gave him a nip.

He keeps his hands above water now, and _me_ at arm’s length.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: WINTER ABROAD.]

[Illustration: WINTER AT HOME.]




The Little Tiny Thing.

[Illustration]


OUT in the garden Mary sat hemming a pocket-handkerchief, and there
came a little insect running—oh, in such a hurry!—across the small
stone table by her side.

The sewing was not done, for Mary liked doing nothing best, and she
thought it would be fun to drop her thimble over the little ant. “Now
he is in the dark,” said she. “Can he mind? He is only such a little
tiny thing.”

Mary ran away, for her mother called her, and she forgot all about the
ant under the thimble.

There he was, running round and round and round the dark prison, with
little horns on his head quivering, little perfect legs bending as
beautifully as those of a race-horse, and he was in quite as big a
fright as if he were an elephant.

“Oh,” you would have heard him say, if you had been clever enough, “I
can’t get out, I can’t get out! I shall lie down and die.” ” Mary went
to bed, and in the night the rain poured. The handkerchief was soaked
as if somebody had been crying very much, when she went out to fetch
it as soon as the sun shone. She remembered who was under the thimble.
“I wonder what he is doing,” said Mary. But when she lifted up the
thimble the little tiny thing lay stiff and still.

“Oh, did he die of being under the thimble?” she said aloud. “I am
afraid he _did_ mind.”

“Why did you do that, Mary?” said her father, who was close by, and who
had guessed the truth. “See! he moves one of his legs. Run to the house
and fetch a wee taste of honey from the breakfast-table for the little
thing you starved.”

“I didn’t mean to,” said Mary.

She touched the honey in the spoon with a blade of grass, and tenderly
put a drop of it before the little ant. He put out a fairy tongue to
lick up the sweet stuff. He grew well, and stood upon his pretty little
jointed feet. He tried to run.

“Where is he in such a hurry to go, do you think?” said father.

“I don’t know,” said Mary softly. She felt ashamed.

“He wants to run home,” said father. “I know where he lives. In a
little round world of ants, under the apple tree.”

“Oh! Has such a little tiny thing a real home of his own? I should have
thought he lived just anywhere about.”

“Why, he would not like that at all. At home he has a fine palace, with
passages and rooms more than you could count; he and the others dug
them out, that they might all live together like little people in a
little town.”

“And has he got a wife and children—a lot of little ants at home?”

“The baby ants are born as eggs; they are little helpless things, and
must be carried about by their big relations. There are father ants and
mother ants, and lots of other ants who are nurses to the little ones.
Nobody knows his own children, but all the grown-up ones are kind to
all the babies. This is a little nurse ant. See how she hurries off!
Her babies at home must have their faces washed.”

“O father!” cried Mary; “now that is a fairy story.”

“Not a bit of it,” said father. “Ants really _do_ clean their young
ones by licking them. On sunny days they carry their babies out, and
let them lie in the sun. On cold days they take them downstairs, away
from the cold wind and the rain. The worker ants are the nurses. Though
the little ones are not theirs, they love them and care for them as
dearly as if they were.”

[Illustration]

“Why, that’s just like Aunt Jenny who lives with us, and mends our
things, and puts baby to bed, and goes out for walks with us.”

“Just the same,” said father, laughing.

“Is that the reason we say _Ant_ Jenny?”

“You little dunce! Who taught you to spell? But it is not a bad idea,
all the same. It would be a good thing if there were as many ‘ant’
Jennys in this big round world of ours as there are in the ants’ little
round world—folk who care for all, no matter whose children they are.”

[Illustration]

While they were talking, the little ant crept to the edge of the table,
and down the side, and was soon lost among the blades of grass.

“He will never find his way,” said Mary.

“Let him alone for that,” said father. “The ants have paths leading
from their hill. They never lose their way. But they meet with sad
accidents sometimes. What do you think I saw the other day? One of
these small chaps—it may have been this very one—was carrying home a
scrap of something in his jaws for the youngsters at home. As he ran
along, a bird dropped an ivy berry on him. Poor mite of a thing! This
was worse than if a cannon ball were to fall from the sky on one of us.
He lay under it, not able to move. By-and-by one of his brother ants,
who was taking a stroll, caught sight of him under the berry.

“What did he do?” said Mary.

“First he tried to push the berry off his friend’s body, but it was
too heavy. Next he caught hold of one of his friend’s legs with his
jaws, and tugged till I thought it would come off. Then he rushed about
in a frantic state, as if he were saying to himself, ‘What shall I do?
what shall I do?’ And then he ran off up the path. In another minute he
came hurrying back with three other ants.”

“Is it quite true, father?”

“Quite. The four ants talked together by gentle touches of their
horns. They looked as if they were telling one another what a dreadful
accident it was, and how nobody knew whose turn would come next. After
this they set to work with a will. Two of them pushed the berry as hard
as they could, while the other two pulled their friend out by the hind
legs. When at last he was free, they crowded round as if petting and
kissing him. You see these little ant folk have found out that ‘’Tis
love, love, love, that makes the world go round.’ I shouldn’t wonder if
that ant you teased so thoughtlessly is gone off to tell the news at
home that there is a drop of honey to be had here.”

“Oh, he couldn’t, father!”

“Wait and see,” said father.

In a little while back came the ant with a troop of friends.

“He has been home and told them the good news about the honey,” said
father. “Do you think that all children are as kind as that?”

Mary said, “No, they’re not. I don’t run to call all the others when I
find a good place for blackberries.”

“Then,” said father, “don’t be unkind to the ant, who is kinder than
you, though he is only a little tiny thing.”

[Illustration: GOOD FRIENDS.]




Questions.

[Illustration]


    OH, where do they sell all the lilies and roses,
    The “pandies” and “pudsies” and funny snub noses,
    The dimpled wee “chin-chops” and fat pinky knees,
    Of the dear little, queer little, babies one sees?

    And what would they want for some soft golden curlies;
    A pair of blue eyes, and two teeth white as pearlies;
    A mouth like a rosebud, just made for a kiss?
    I fear they would ask me a great deal for this.

    And where is the gentle school-mistress who teaches
    The mothers and grannies their sweet baby speeches,
    Their “lovies” and “dovies” and tender “coo-coos”
    That the newest new pet understands in two twos?


Answers.

    ALAS! and alas! you may search through the city,
    Yet ne’er find the shop where they sell things so pretty;
    But I think it’s the angels from far, far away,
    Teach the mothers and grannies the sweet things they say.




A Lesson in Manners.

    THERE was once a dear little, queer little cat,
      The sweetest kit e’er seen,
    Who made up her mind to journey
      To town to see the queen.

[Illustration]

    Mr. Puggy, a teacher of manners and dancing,
      Gave her a lesson or two.
    “Observe my instructions, Miss Tabby,
      And be sure to do as I do.”

[Illustration]

    But Tabby espied her saucer of milk,
      And made a dart at that,
    While Pug distressfully murmured,
     “What a very ill-bred cat!”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

The Prize Boat.


“DON’T do it, Dick!” pleaded Dolly.

“Girls always spoil sport!” growled Mark, as he saw Dick ready to give
in.

“We shan’t hurt the boat! Don’t be silly, Dolly. Even if the sails do
get wet, Tom can get fresh ones. And it will be better for him to know
whether it will sail or not.” And the twins departed for the seashore
with the boat in their hands.

How they wished they had taken Dolly’s advice, when they saw the ship,
which had sailed so gallantly at first in the little cove, break from
its moorings and drift out to sea!

Tom had worked very hard for the prize of £2 offered in a weekly paper
for the best-made boat, not only for the sake of the money, but because
the toys were to go to the Home for Orphans. And now all his work was
gone.

“Oh! well, it can’t be helped,” he said good-naturedly, when his first
feeling of anger had passed; “but I wish you chaps would leave my
things alone.”

“But it can be helped,” said Dolly, rushing in. “See! a fisherman
brought it to shore, and it isn’t a bit broken.”

So the orphans got the boat after all, and had great fun sailing it in
the river near the Home; and what was perhaps more wonderful, Tom won
the prize.

[Illustration]




The Little Thief in the Pantry.


“MOTHER dear,” said a little mouse one day, “I think the people in our
house must be very kind; don’t you? They leave such nice things for us
in the larder.”

There was a twinkle in the mother’s eye as she replied,—

“Well, my child, no doubt they are very well in their way, but I
don’t think they are quite as fond of us as you seem to think. Now
remember, Greywhiskers, I have absolutely forbidden you to put your
nose above the ground unless I am with you, for kind as the people are,
I shouldn’t be at all surprised if they tried to catch you.”

Greywhiskers twitched his tail with scorn; he was quite sure he knew
how to take care of himself, and he didn’t mean to trot meekly after
his mother’s tail all his life. So as soon as she had curled herself
up for an afternoon nap he stole away, and scampered across the pantry
shelves.

Ah! here was something particularly good to-day. A large iced cake
stood far back upon the shelf, and Greywhiskers licked his lips as he
sniffed it. Across the top of the cake there were words written in pink
sugar; but as Greywhiskers could not read, he did not know that he was
nibbling at little Miss Ethel’s birthday cake. But he did feel a little
guilty when he heard his mother calling. Off he ran, and was back in
the nest again by the time his mother had finished rubbing her eyes
after her nap.

She took Greywhiskers up to the pantry then, and when she saw the hole
in the cake she seemed a little annoyed.

[Illustration]

“Some mouse has evidently been here before us,” she said, but of course
she never guessed that it was her own little son.

The next day the naughty little mouse again popped up to the pantry
when his mother was asleep; but at first he could find nothing at all
to eat, though there was a most delicious smell of toasted cheese.

Presently he found a dear little wooden house, and there hung the
cheese, just inside it.

In ran Greywhiskers, but, oh! “click” went the little wooden house, and
mousie was caught fast in a trap.

When the morning came, the cook, who had set the trap, lifted it from
the shelf, and then called a pretty little girl to come and see the
thief who had eaten her cake.

“What are you going to do with him?” asked Ethel.

“Why, drown him, my dear, to be sure.”

The tears came into the little girl’s pretty blue eyes.

“You didn’t know it was stealing, did you, mousie dear?” she said.

“No,” squeaked Greywhiskers sadly; “indeed I didn’t.”

Cook’s back was turned for a moment, and in that moment tender-hearted
little Ethel lifted the lid of the trap, and out popped mousie.

Oh! how quickly he ran home to his mother, and how she comforted and
petted him until he began to forget his fright; and then she made him
promise never to disobey her again, and you may be sure he never did.




Great-Grandmother’s Wish.


“DID you ever see a fairy, grannie?” said Trots.

“No,” she said, “but my great-grandmother did.”

[Illustration: A VISIT TO GRANNIE.]

“Oh, do tell me!” cried Trots.

“Well, once upon a time, as she was carrying her butter to market,
she picked up a crooked sixpence. And with it, and what she sold her
butter for, she bought a little black pig. Now, coming home, she had
to cross the brook; so she picked piggy up in her arms and carried her
over the brook. And, lo, instead of a pig, there was a little fairy in
her arms!”

“Oh!” cried Trots, “what was it like?”

“Well, it had a red cap on its head, and a green frock, and it had
gauzy wings, and it wanted to fly away, but great-grandmother held it
tight.

“‘Please let me go,’ said the fairy.

“‘What will you give me?’ said great-grandmother.

“‘I will give you one wish,’” answered the fairy.

So great-grandmother thought and thought what was the best thing to
wish for, and at last she said,—

“‘Give to me and to my daughters to the eleventh generation the lucky
finger and the loving heart.’

“‘You have wished a big wish,’ said the fairy, ‘but you shall have
it.’” So she kissed great-grandmother’s eyes and mouth, and then she
flew away.

“And did the wish come true?” asked Trots.

“Always—always,” answered grannie. “We have been since then the best
spinners and knitters in all the countryside, and the best wives and
daughters.”

“But,” said Trots, “what will the eleventh generation do when the wish
stops and the good-luck?”

“I don’t know,” said grannie, shaking her head. “I suppose they’ll have
to catch a fairy of their own.”





Transcriber’s notes:

A Table of Contents was created for this text version.

  Not Such Fun as it Seemed:
      ... and Dolly was generally only too eager to join in her
      brothers pranks. Brothers corrected to brother’s.
      ... and Dolly was generally only too eager to join in her
      brother’s pranks.

  The Little Tiny Thing:
      ... said father. Do you think that all children
      are as kind as that?” Missing opening quotation mark before the
      word Do. Opening quotation mark inserted.
      ... said father. “Do you think that all children
      are as kind as that?”

  Great-Granmother’s Wish:
     “‘I will give you one wish,’ answered the fairy.
     Missing ending closing double quotation mark. Inserted
     “‘I will give you one wish,’” answered the fairy.

     “‘You have wished a big wish,’ said the fairy, ‘but
     you shall have it.’ So she kissed great-grandmother’s eyes
     and mouth, and then she flew away.” Misplaced ending double quote.
     Repositioned—“‘You have wished a big wish,’ said the fairy, ‘but
     you shall have it.’” So she kissed great-grandmother’s eyes
     and mouth, and then she flew away.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Christmas Hamper, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTMAS HAMPER ***

***** This file should be named 53299-0.txt or 53299-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/2/9/53299/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy, Susan Theresa Morin and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Books
project.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

