The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Electric Man, by Charles Hannan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Electric Man
       Being the One Act Version of the Three Act Farcical Comedy
       of the Same Name

Author: Charles Hannan

Release Date: January 10, 2020 [EBook #61142]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ELECTRIC MAN ***




Produced by Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









THE ELECTRIC MAN




  THE ELECTRIC MAN

  BEING THE ONE ACT VERSION OF THE
  SUCCESSFUL THREE ACT FARCICAL
  COMEDY OF THE SAME NAME

  By

  CHARLES HANNAN

  _Author of_

  “_A Cigarette Maker’s Romance_,” “_Master of the Situation_,” “_The
  Coachman with Yellow Lace_,” “_Iron Hand and Velvet Glove_,”
  “_The World’s Way_,” “_United States_,” “_Sweet Olivia_,”
  “_Richard Wye_,” “_The New Groom_,” “_The Setting
  of the Sun_,” “_The Gipsy_,” “_A Fragment_,” “_The
  Lily of the Field_,” _etc., etc., and in
  collaboration with Wilson Barrett_,
  “_Our Pleasant Sins_.”

  COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY SAMUEL FRENCH, LTD


  NEW YORK
  SAMUEL FRENCH
  PUBLISHER
  28-30 WEST 38TH STREET

  LONDON
  SAMUEL FRENCH LTD
  26 SOUTHAMPTON STREET
  STRAND




Any costumes, wigs or properties used in the performance of “The
Electric Man” may be hired or purchased reasonably from Messrs. C. H.
Fox, Ltd., 27, Wellington Street, Strand, London.




THE ELECTRIC MAN.


The three act successful farcical comedy, “The Electric Man,” which may
be obtained in manuscript from Messrs. Samuel French, Ltd., was first
presented at the King’s Theatre, Hammersmith, with Mr. Harcourt Beatty
in the leading rôle, and was subsequently put on for a West End run
at the Royalty Theatre on November 10, 1906, with Mr. Harry Nicholls
as the Electric Man, the piece being transferred to the Shaftesbury
Theatre on Boxing Day of the same year.

       *       *       *       *       *

The condensed one act form of the play which follows was produced by
Mr. Harry Nicholls at the Chelsea Palace and Metropolitan Halls with
the greatest success on July 29, 1907, cast thus:--

  WALTER EVEREST and THE ELECTRIC MAN              _Mr. Harry Nicholls_.
  DR. JACK STRANGE, a young physician, his friend  _Mr. Loring Fernie_.
  STELLA, Jack’s sister, Walter’s fiancée          _Miss Fitzgerald_.
  MRS. ANDERSON, his landlady                      _Miss Nellie Dade_.
  JOBBINS, a private detective and inquiry agent   _Mr. Thorpe Tracey_.

  _Period_: Present day. Morning.

  _Time of representation_: Twenty-six minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

Walter and the automaton are never upon the stage together, so that
throughout the play Walter takes the figure’s place by entering the
cupboard “off.” A super is required, however, to play “dummy,” but when
this happens the figure is seated in the cupboard with its back to
audience.

COSTUME for Walter and for the automaton: Walter wears a brown coat or
jacket and trousers of the same, with a white waistcoat. The automaton
is dressed exactly the same as to trousers and waistcoat, etc., but
wears a black frock coat, and as they both usually keep the coat
buttoned, the waistcoat is seldom seen.

“_Funeral March of a Marionette_” to accompany the automaton’s scenes.
The automaton walks very stiffly and jerkily, and moves his arms like a
doll.

[Illustration: PLAN OF SET.

D in F indicates the opening leading to hall.

R the entry to drawing-room.

There are curtains at each side of the window recess,

And a Grandfather’s clock against wall, front of china cupboard.]




THE ELECTRIC MAN


  SCENE.--_WALTER’S rooms in London. Moderately furnished sitting-room._

  _On table R. a newspaper and two unopened letters._

  _The table up in the alcove is set for luncheon._

  _WALTER’S brown bowler is lying on chair or sofa L._

  _The cupboard door has a spring so that it closes of itself when left
  open, a string being also tacked across the inside of the door so
  that WALTER can pull the door to after him at end of play. A large
  bamboo rocking-chair is used for the figure, and is easily moved and
  turned as directed._

  (_Enter JACK and MRS. ANDERSON D. in F._)

MRS. ANDERSON. It’s as I thought, sir, the pore young gent isn’t up.

JACK (_looks at his watch_). Was he late last night?

MRS. ANDERSON. Oh, yes, sir, as I happens to know being woked up
sudden, thinkering to hear a burgular, which was only Master Walter
Everest, the gent I does for, a-creepering and a-crawlering upstairs.

JACK. Is he often like that? (_Takes up and looks at letters on table
and puts them down again._)

MRS. ANDERSON. Lawk a floury! no, sir, only breaks out occasional when
his work’s bad. Mr. Everest is a chemist and electerician.

JACK. Been working hard lately?

MRS. ANDERSON. I believes as he have something very musterious and
secret inventering at this here identical period of time, some mustery
as he keeps in that there cupboard which the door is always locked
constant. Oh, very musterious--and queer smells a-penetratering and
perfuncteroring the house. Oh, here he are, sir.

  (_WALTER’S door L. opens. She exits D. in F._)

  (_WALTER stumbles in L. He is not to look dissipated, but to act it._)

WALTER. Hullo, hullo! whose head is this? It isn’t mine, it can’t be
mine. Stop! (_Sits top of R. table._) Stop! (_Picks up newspaper._)
Morning paper, who wants morning paper? (_Throws it on floor behind
him, and JACK, who is watching him, picks it up. WALTER opens letter._)
Letters, who wants letters?--oh, one from my tailor, “We greatly regret
delay in delivery of your new black coat. We will despatch it to
reach your residence without fail to-day. May we remind you that your
account----?” No, you may _not_ remind me.

  (_JACK gives him a rousing smack on the back._)

Hullo, Jack, where did you spring from?

JACK. Came to town this morning. (_Clasp hands._)

WALTER. Jack, I’m very ill. I haven’t been out of doors till last
night for weeks. Nothing but work at what my father left me. He gave
_his_ lifetime to it and then left it to me. It ought to have been the
invention of the age. I went on the spree last night, when the whole
thing failed.

JACK. I have some news for you about your stepmother, Mrs. Everest.
By the idiotic conditions of your late father’s will--if the old lady
marries again before your birthday on Monday next the whole fortune he
left becomes not yours but hers.

WALTER. He meant it the other way about.

JACK. Yes, but that is how the will reads--instead of writing “_He_
shall inherit,” your father wrote “_she_ shall inherit.” She is the
“she.” About forty-five thou., isn’t it?

WALTER. Nearer fifty.

JACK. An adventurer named Potterfield has lately come to the village,
found out about the will, made love to the old lady, got a special
license, and is bringing her to town to marry her to-morrow.

WALTER. What?

JACK. Stella is coming here directly. This wedding must be stopped or
postponed.

WALTER. Jack, something’s got to be done--suppose I were taken
ill--very ill.

JACK. No good at all.

WALTER. Well, suppose that--no, that’s no use--suppose again that--no,
that’s no good either. I have a dim kind of idea that in some way my
invention is going to help us.

JACK. You said it had failed.

WALTER. It failed living; it might be of use dead. (_Swiss Jodel._)
Hullo, tra la la! (_Momentary dissipated business._)

  (_STELLA enters D. in F._)

WALTER. Hullo, Stella how are you? Jack has told me all about this
adventurer, Potterfield. I’ve an idea to checkmate my stepmother.
(_Gives her seat._) I’m going to postpone their marriage not by being
ill--I’m going to die. What do you think of that?

JACK. I think it’s the weakest thing I ever heard of.

WALTER. In that cupboard there is a figure exactly like myself which
was timed to spring into existence yesterday at 5 p.m.--only it didn’t.
It’s the work my father never completed. Something went wrong. There
the figure is and will remain, dead as a nut. I even dressed it in my
best clothes, gave it a name, too, christened it Cyril Davidson.

STELLA. Cyril Davidson? (_Laughs._)

JACK. What was the little idea of making it like yourself?

WALTER. My father’s instructions were to make the man I was creating
a handsome, good-looking fellow, according to the very best available
model. All you’ve got to do is to produce the dead figure and say it’s
me. I’ll go away to Brighton; they can’t in common decency marry before
the funeral.

JACK. Then it seems you made an electric man. _My_ chief doubt is it
won’t be like enough.

WALTER. Come and see!

  (_Music. He takes key from pocket, unlocks door of cupboard, and a
  man in black frock-coat, with black bowler, is seen seated with back
  to audience._)

STELLA. Oh, how wonderful! (_Looking in._)

JACK. Wonderful! (_Looking in._)

STELLA. Walter, that _is_ you!

  (_Bell rings off D. in F._)

WALTER. Bell!--that may be my stepmother! (_He quickly closes
cupboard._) We might go into the other room. I call it my drawing-room,
because there is a piano and three gold-fish in a bowl.

  (_STELLA goes into room R._)

Jack, in case she comes I’d better be off. Can you lend me any cash?

JACK. How much do you want? (_Producing loose cash._)

WALTER. Two or three pounds. (_Looks in JACK’S hand._) I’ll take four.
(_Does so._) Stop, I’ll give you a duplicate key of the cupboard.
(_Gives key._) The figure has got my black coat on, and I want it for
Brighton. When you come back, it will be wearing _this_ one. (_Pointing
to coat he is wearing._)

JACK. Right.

WALTER. Explain that to Stella.

JACK. Right oh! (_JACK goes into drawing-room R._)

  (_WALTER picks up and puts on his brown bowler, goes quickly up,
  unlocks cupboard, puts key back in pocket, then goes in after
  saying:_)

WALTER. Now, Mr. Davidson, my coat, if you please.

  (_He opens door wide, showing figure seated as before, then goes in
  and the door closes._)

  (_He is then heard calling loudly in cupboard:_)

I say! let me go! confound you--Jack--Jack--I say! the thing is moving!

  (_Loud noise of struggle._)

Hold on, damn it! don’t hit me on the head! Do you want to STUN me?
Jack!

  (_A loud cry and two thumps, then the cupboard door slowly opens,
  AUTOMATON puts head out--the actor having had time to change into
  the black coat before entering as the automaton. It creeps out, not
  opening the door more than necessary--business, tries to re-open
  door by hitting it. It wears the black bowler set to one side of
  head. Comes down C., stiffly, and remarks, “Yow,” then goes up. MRS.
  ANDERSON enters D. in F. with dishes and sets table in recess with
  back to audience. He goes towards MRS. ANDERSON. She starts on seeing
  his strange manner. He turns and goes across and straight off D. in
  F., she goes after him._)

MRS. ANDERSON (_calling after him_). Mr. Everest, sir!

  (_Exit AUTOMATON D. in F._)

  (_Exit MRS. ANDERSON D. in F._)

  (_JACK and STELLA enter from R._)

JACK. I left him changing his coat.

STELLA (_looking out of window_). There he is turning the corner; he
_has_ changed his coat.

JACK. Let’s have a proper look at this wonderful thing before the old
lady comes.

  (_They fetch out chair with WALTER seated on it and bring it down
  stage, where they wheel the chair right round so that the stunned
  WALTER faces audience. He is hatless._)

STELLA. Hasn’t it slipped down in the chair since we saw it last?

JACK. I don’t think so.

STELLA. Look at its eyes--Jack, they’re opening--it’s moving!

JACK. Great Heavens! it’s being born!

WALTER (_half stunned and waking_). Where am I?

STELLA. It speaks!

JACK. It’s living!

WALTER. I want a drink!

JACK. Good lord! It drinks!

  (_STELLA screams and falls on seat. Bell again rings loudly off R._)

Hullo! there’s Mrs. Everest! (_He takes WALTER, who has risen, by the
arm._) Come with me, sir (_leads him to bedroom L._). In there with
you, quick!

  (_Kicks him in quickly, and locks door._)

  (_STELLA meantime has hurried up with the chair and put it in cupboard
  and closes door._)

Phew! this is the most extraordinary thing! (_Hurries down, saying:_)
Where are the telegraph forms?

  (_As he snatches them from nail on wall, and sits to write R., MRS.
  ANDERSON enters D. in F. out of breath and with a telegram; she is
  in process of dressing, her hair being in disorder, and she wears a
  dressing jacket._)

MRS. ANDERSON. Telegrapheram, sir. (_Down and gives it._)

JACK (_looking at telegram_). From Mrs. Everest--“Have missed
train, don’t wait lunch--coming by next.” Thank goodness! (_To MRS.
ANDERSON._) I suppose you don’t know where I can find a detective?

MRS. ANDERSON. Yes, sir, I does. Being my own nephew as lives in the
attic.

JACK (_writes several telegrams, as:_) I want him at once----

MRS. ANDERSON. Lawk a floury me!

  (_Hurries out D. in F._)

STELLA. What are you writing? (_Takes up one of the telegrams._)
“Walter Everest, _Ship Hotel_, Brighton. Cyril Davidson is living. Come
home.”

  (_WALTER knocks loudly at bedroom door._)

Jack! listen!

JACK (_still writing--knocking repeated_). Coming--coming.

  (_Knocking ceases--he continues._)

This goes to every hotel in Brighton.

STELLA. He may not be at an hotel.

JACK. That’s why I’ve sent for a detective----

  (_JOBBINS enters, hat in hand and umbrella under arm; he is a stout
  man, rather shabbily dressed in tweed, with tweed frock-coat, and has
  a square-topped bowler._)

JOBBINS. My name is Jobbins, sir. (_Gives large card._) Private inquiry
and detective agent, utmost secrecy and despatch, parties watched,
missing relatives traced, divorces ensured.

JACK. This is a very simple matter, Mr. Jobbins. The gentleman who
resides here left home suddenly. I want him fetched back at once.
(_Sits and writes note as:_)

JOBBINS. Yes, sir (_goes up, then returns_), where is he? (_With
notebook open to take notes._)

JACK. Brighton.

JOBBINS (_notes_). Brighton--what hotel, sir?

JACK. Do you think if I knew what hotel I should require a detective?

JOBBINS. Then how am I to find him?

JACK. The best thing will be to take the first train to Brighton.

JOBBINS (_notes_). First train to Brighton.

JACK. He may be at a boarding-house.

JOBBINS (_notes_). Possibly a boarding-house.

JACK. When you find him give him this note (_closing it and giving
it_), and send me a wire. (_Gives five-pound note._) There is some cash
for your expenses.

STELLA. How is he to know Walter?

JACK. Isn’t there a photograph? (_Finds one on mantel R._) Here we are.
(_Gives it._)

JOBBINS. I’ll walk about the Brighton streets with this--why, I seen
this gent in the public gardens five minutes ago.

JACK. Then after him and bring him back.

JOBBINS (_at D. in F._). You’ll hear from me--BY WIRE.

  (_Exit._)

JACK (_calls out after him_). Follow him to Victoria; if you miss him,
go right on. (_Comes down._) I’ve forgotten these telegrams.

STELLA. I’ll take them.

JACK (_gives them_). Have you any cash?

STELLA. Yes. (_Hurries out D. in F._)

  (_A very loud peremptory knocking at D.L. JACK listens a moment--it is
  repeated._)

JACK. Getting nasty! (_Loud knocking._)

WALTER (_off, calls_). I say--let me out!

JACK. Now if I had not known, I should have said that was Walter. The
voice was a trifle thick at starting, but now its identical.

WALTER (_off_). Let me out. (_Loud knocking._)

JACK. I suppose I’ll have to.

  (_He goes and unlocks door and returns to R. front--WALTER comes
  out._)

WALTER. What is the meaning of all this?

JACK. That’s exactly what I want to know.

WALTER. Locking a fellow in a bedroom.

JACK (_aside_). Calls itself a fellow and knows it’s a bedroom!

WALTER. I feel as stupid (_he is still half-stunned_) as an owl. Where
is Stella?

JACK. Knows about Stella!

WALTER. What are you muttering?

JACK. Knows I’m muttering!

WALTER. Well?

JACK. Well.

WALTER. Why the devil don’t you speak?

JACK. Knows there’s a devil! I really don’t quite know what to do with
you till your creator returns.

WALTER. What?--How?

JACK. What or how--same thing. This is a pretty pickle, Mr. Cyril
Davidson.

WALTER. Mr. _What_?

JACK. Of course you don’ know your name yet; that is what you were
christened, Cyril Davidson, so I call you Cyril Davidson.

WALTER. Oh, you do, do you? that’s very clever of you. My mind’s a
blank, I can’t remember what happened before I woke up on that chair.

JACK. No one remembers what happened before they were born.

WALTER (_bangs a book down on table_). Oh, damned nonsense!

JACK. I wonder what you think of the world now you’ve come into it;
what are your general impressions of mankind?

WALTER. Was this why you locked me in the bedroom?

JACK. Exactly.

WALTER. And are you going to keep this up?

JACK. Decidedly.

WALTER. I can’t see much sense in it myself; however, if it pleases
you--I’m going to have some lunch. (_Goes up to table in recess._)

JACK (_calls up_). Mr. Davidson! (_No answer._) I’ve made it angry.
(_Calls._) Mr. Davidson--I say, Davidson--Mr. Cyril Davidson--sir,--oh,
it’s in a pet and declines to answer me.

  (_STELLA enters D. in F._)

STELLA. Jack, a boy brought this. (_Gives note._)

JACK (_tears it open_). Jobbins is something like a detective. “Just
seen Mr. Everest, he is running. Jobbins.”

STELLA. Running?

JACK. The electric individual is in there.

STELLA. You let it out? What is it doing?

JACK. Lunching.

WALTER (_at table in alcove, mixing salad_). Nothing here but salad!
(_With beer bottle._) Beer, who wants beer?

JACK. Knows all about everything!

STELLA. It’s been listening in the cupboard before it lived. (_Pause
and then asks._) Should we speak to it?

JACK. It’s very bad-tempered, but I daresay it won’t hurt you. (_They
go up._) I say, Davidson!

WALTER. Bah! (_They start back._)

STELLA. Poor thing! tell it it’s amongst friends.

  (_They again approach._)

JACK. This young lady is very anxious to make your acquaintance, Mr.
Davidson!

  (_WALTER smashes crockery with a beer bottle; they start and come down
  in fright, then approach again._)

STELLA. Please, Mr. Davidson!

WALTER (_turns_). Oh, _you’ve_ come back; has Jack told you what he’s
playing at?

  (_He comes down a little--they retreat from him._)

JACK. Isn’t it wonderful! Calls me Jack!

WALTER (_as they are staring at him_). When you’ve done staring,
perhaps you’ll drop this.

STELLA. Jack, I can’t believe it! (_WALTER walks about in rage._)

JACK. At first I couldn’t, but there is a difference, I begin to see
it, a very subtle difference; watch how it moves; aren’t its joints a
little stiff and so on?

WALTER (_quick step to him_). You thick-headed-addle-pated numskull!

  (_JACK in fright falls headlong backwards over sofa L., STELLA runs
  and crouches R., then they rise on knees and wave to pacify him._)

JACK. Gently, gently!

STELLA. Oh, please, Mr. Davidson, please don’t be so angry; we are both
awfully interested in you and really sorry for you. It must be terrible
to be born full grown.

WALTER. Am I mad, or are you?

JACK. _You_ are.

WALTER. That’s settled.

STELLA. Of course, you think you’re real, but we _know_. You’re only a
made thing, like a cheese or a pudding.

WALTER (_hand to head_). You honestly say and believe that I am my own
invention? (_They nod solemnly._)

WALTER. Am I myself, or am I the thing I made?

JACK. You are the thing you made.

WALTER. Then where is myself--the other fellow?

JACK. Your esteemed creator left home before you began to exist,
changed coats and went.

WALTER. Changed coats? I never changed coats at all!

JACK.   }
        } What?
STELLA. }

WALTER. The moment I tried to, the figure rose up and stunned me.

STELLA (_up to him, throws arms round him_). It’s Walter!

  (_Enter MRS. ANDERSON with telegram D. in F., and gives it. JACK opens
  it._)

MRS. ANDERSON (_seeing WALTER_). Ow! Ow! Lawk a floury me!

  (_Exit._)

JACK. Jobbins is somewhere near Euston. (_Gives telegram to STELLA._)

WALTER. Who’s Jobbins?

JACK. The detective who’s gone after you to bring you back.

WALTER. Then it really went out?

STELLA (_reading telegram_). “Have taken a cab, he’s still running.”
What will happen if Mr. Jobbins catches it?

WALTER. I expect he _will_ catch it.

JACK. Another telegram! (_Going up to D. in F._)

  (_MRS. ANDERSON hands in a telegram and retires._)

  (_Coming down, reading:_) “He has smashed some more windows, and is
  still running.”

STELLA (_taking the telegram_). More windows!

JACK. “The crowd are still after him.”

WALTER. Crowd?

JACK. “He has just climbed a tall chimney stack marked Bovril, and is
now sitting on the top.”

WALTER. Good Lord!

JACK. “Marked Bovril,” is this to be your fate, alas, my poor brother!

WALTER (_snatches the wire and reads_). “They are fetching a fire
escape. He keeps yowling.”

STELLA (_taking telegram_). Yowling?

WALTER. Suppose the police get him and think it’s me, I’ll be blamed
for all this damned thing. We must catch him. We’ll buy a gag and
handcuffs as we go along.

STELLA. Gag? Why?

WALTER. Because he’s yowling! Stop! Stella must stay in case Mrs.
Everest comes. (_Calls._) Mrs. Anderson! I want a cab!

  (_He and JACK rush out D. in F._)

STELLA. I’m so excited I think I’ll play the piano in the other room.

  (_Exit R. to drawing-room and immediately plays and sings
  “Caressante.”_)

  (_AUTOMATON enters D. in F., in black frock-coat, but now hatless,
  goes to cupboard, paws at the door, goes and knocks over chair, then
  to table up L. and takes up a tumbler, brings it down mechanically to
  front C., half raises it, then lets it fall on the floor and sits by
  table R., facing audience and says:_)

AUTOMATON. Tick-tick-Yow.

  (_MRS. ANDERSON enters D. in F. with a black frock-coat in tailor’s
  parcel, places it on table R. top end, then sees AUTOMATON and comes
  out C., to speak._)

MRS. ANDERSON. Oh, he’s there, are he? (_Using handkerchief as she
speaks._)

AUTOMATON. Yow.

MRS. ANDERSON. There’s a parcel from the tailoring folks with a message
hopering as it were in time.

AUTOMATON. Yow-Yow. (_She starts a little._)

MRS. ANDERSON. The pore young lady is a-sittering in there.

AUTOMATON. Tick-tick. Yow-yow! (_Same business._)

MRS. ANDERSON. Ain’t you in good ’ealth, Mr. Everest, sir?

AUTOMATON. Yow-chuck, Yow-yow.

  (_Rises and makes mechanical exit to bedroom L._)

MRS. ANDERSON (_watching him_). Pore-young-man!

  (_Enter STELLA R._)

Mr. Everest have come back, mum; gone in his bedroom, mum; been to the
pub.-house again, or I’m much mistook. Pore-young-man!

  (_Exit D. in F._)

STELLA (_calls across_). Walter, here’s a parcel--Walter!

  (_AUTOMATON enters door L., but does not come out, she sees him._)

Walter, why have you left Jack? Is anything wrong?

AUTOMATON. Yow! (_Turns and goes in again D.L._)

STELLA (_crossing to the door_). Walter! (_Door shuts._) How very
polite of you! Are you changing? (_Voice off says, “Yow.”_) Oh, very
well, if you won’t answer me. I’m in the drawing-room all alone!

  (_Has crossed back to R., and goes in._)

AUTOMATON (_enters L._). Tick-chuck-yow. (_Goes up, hits door of
cupboard twice._) Chuck-yow-yow.

  (_Goes to recess, knocks over a chair, hits clock, etc., and goes
  into china cupboard in recess L. A loud noise of smashing of crockery
  off. STELLA through this is playing and singing same air as before._)

  (_WALTER comes in D. in F., as soon as ever he can, walking quite
  quietly as contrast to the very quick exit of AUTOMATON. Brown
  jacket._)

WALTER (_comes to table R., calling_). Stella! I want you. Stella!

STELLA (_stops singing a moment to call_). I’m not coming! (_Resumes
song off._)

WALTER (_takes up parcel_). My new coat at last. The moment I get
Davidson under lock and key I’m going to change into this and get away
to Brighton. (_Puts parcel down._)

  (_STELLA enters R._)

Why wouldn’t you come a minute ago?

STELLA. Why did you shut that door in my face?

WALTER. When?

STELLA. After you went out.

WALTER. After I went out--before I came home? Did I speak?

STELLA. No.

WALTER. It’s as plain as a pikestaff, it’s come home!

STELLA (_slowly and firmly_). I believe you’re right. Now I’ve seen you
both I’ll never mistake again.

WALTER. It must be somewhere on the premises now.

  (_They hurriedly look about under furniture, and meet and collide up
  C., and say, “Oh!” Noise in china cupboard._)

WALTER. It’s in the bedroom. Run down to Mrs. Anderson and borrow the
very largest blanket.

STELLA. Why?

WALTER. I want something to throw over it.

  (_STELLA exit D. in F._)

WALTER (_listens to fresh sounds_). No! It’s in the china cupboard!

  (_A wooden hand with fingers extended is mysteriously thrust out of
  china cupboard door. He gets a plate and smashes it on this hand,
  which is at once withdrawn. This can be done with a real hand and
  smash plate on door near it._)

  (_He quickly turns key._)

WALTER. Got it--got it!

  (_He jubilantly dances down C., then goes and calls out D. in F._)

Stella, Stella, I’ve locked it in the china cupboard. I don’t want
the blanket. (_Returns._) Gone in the kitchen, I suppose! (_Takes up
parcel._) Change my coat at last and get away! (_Goes into bedroom L._)

  (_Immediately on his exit a loud smashing in china clipboard, then
  the door flies into splinters and is knocked down, and AUTOMATON
  enters quickly, hurries right round C., and into bedroom after
  WALTER._)

WALTER (_within, as loud noise in bedroom_). Hi! stop!

AUTOMATON (_within_). Yow-yow.

WALTER (_rushing in, dressed in black coat_). By Jove! what an escape!

  (_JACK, carrying blanket of green flannel or red, enters with STELLA,
  who has gag and handcuffs--enter D. in F._)

  (_WALTER makes signs to them, pointing to bedroom and beckoning them
  to follow him there._)

JACK. Is that it?

STELLA. Yes, yes, Jack, yes!

  (_JACK throws blanket over WALTER, and they get him on chair C._)

JACK. Hurrah! we’ve got him now! (_Business: secure him with rope round
his legs and gag, then take blanket off._) (_WALTER, gagged, groans._)
No more climbing tall chimney stacks! (_WALTER groans._)

STELLA. Is it in pain?

JACK. Of course not.

STELLA. It groans so!

JACK. Rather mad at being caught.

STELLA. Is it wax-work?

JACK. More like indiarubber. I suppose you do see the difference this
time?

STELLA. Rather.

JACK. That’s not flesh and blood. (_Pulling its nose._)

STELLA. It seems to want to explain something.

JACK. It will never get the chance of that. (_Lighting a candle from
mantel R._)

STELLA. Poor thing! are you tired of living? (_Groan._)

JACK. How can it answer you?

STELLA. I believe it could if you took the gag out of its mouth.

JACK. Hold the candle under its nose. (_Groan._)

STELLA. No, no, no! (_JACK puts candle on table._)

JACK (_with pin from waistcoat_). I want to see what it will do when I
stick this pin in it. (_Groan._)

STELLA. No, no!

JACK. In its leg, you can nip its arms and legs. (_Does so--groan._)

STELLA. It doesn’t seem to like being nipped.

JACK. In the interests of science I’m going to bleed it. (_Loud
groans._) Give me a carving knife. (_Groans._)

  (_MRS. ANDERSON has entered and come down--sees WALTER, screams. They
  start._)

MRS. ANDERSON. The gent I does for came down the other stair from the
bedroom (_pointing L._) and is in the kitchen premises at this here
identical period of time.

JACK. What! _Is_ he?

MRS. ANDERSON. Here have I been a-doing for two twins at the price of
one.

JACK (_bustles MRS. ANDERSON to D. in F._). Send Mr. Everest up at
once! (_Exit MRS. ANDERSON._)

JACK. Now to make an end of this fiend!

  (_WALTER, who has been watching them as well as he could, now pretends
  to be dead._)

Hullo! I don’t think I’ll want any instruments, it’s passing away!
(_Business._) Not breathing! (_Looks at watch._) It’s eyes are closed.
Oh! it’s run down. I believe we’d be quite safe to unbind it. Just help
me with this rope. Let it pass away quietly on the sofa. There is
something pathetic even in the death of a doll.

  (_They unbind WALTER and raise him, he opens his eyes and bounds upon
  JACK--commotion._)

Confound it, it’s living again!

  (_STELLA runs in room R., JACK runs in room L._)

WALTER (_as JACK looks in L., and STELLA looks in R._). I say! (_They
at once withdraw._) Jack! Stella! (_Heads appear again._) I say! Jack!
(_Heads disappear._) Come out, you bounder! (_Heads appear._) Why are
you making such idiots of yourselves?

JACK (_coming in_). Who are you?

WALTER. Walter Everest.

JACK. The other fellow said that.

WALTER. I _am_ the other fellow.

JACK. Then I’ve let the automaton escape!

WALTER. Escape?

JACK. _It_ must be in the kitchen now!

WALTER. I have a particularly heavy poker in my room, I’ll just fetch
it.

JACK. And then?

WALTER. We’ll see what then! (_Has gone into bedroom L._)

JACK. This _is_ a nice muddle! What asses we’ve been!

STELLA. Yes, haven’t we?

JACK. By Jove! we have.

  (_AUTOMATON comes in D. in F., followed by MRS. ANDERSON with a
  telegram--they both go quickly into drawing-room R._)

MRS. ANDERSON (_calling as she goes_). Telegrapheram, Mr. Everest, sir!

STELLA (_down L. with JACK points up to them as they go out_). Jack!
look!

  (_Piano is smashed off R._)

Oh, what’s that?

JACK. That’s the piano! (_Glass is smashed off R._) That’s the three
gold-fish in the bowl!

  (_WALTER with poker enters L._)

MRS. ANDERSON (_off_). Oh, help! (_She rushes in from R. in a fainting
condition and gasps._) Mr. Everest have fell out of the window into the
street!

WALTER. Mrs. Anderson, I am here.

  (_She gives a loud yell of fright in his face and rushes into bedroom
  L. STELLA hastens after her._)

WALTER. There’s going to be no mistake this time, I’m going after it
myself. (_Exit D. in F._)

  (_JOBBINS enters D. in F., his hat bashed, a black eye, and one arm
  in a sling. He is in a miserable condition._)

JACK. Great goodness! Jobbins!

JOBBINS. What’s left of him, sir!

AUTOMATON (_off at back_). Yow-yow.

JOBBINS (_on his knees clings to JACK_). I calls on you to protect me!

JACK. We must search this house from top to toe. You chase up, I’ll
chase down. And if we don’t find him, meet here.

JOBBINS. I’ll do that (_they go up_), meet here!

  (_Exeunt._)

STELLA (_looks in L._). Jack, she’s getting better--Jack! where are
you? (_Goes in again._)

  (_JOBBINS enters D. in F., comes down, saying:_)

JOBBINS. Missed him! (_Sits L. of R. table_). I’ll just make out my
little bill.

  (_As he is doing this, AUTOMATON enters D. in F., comes down and has
  a spasm with his hands, knocking off JOBBINS’ hat. JOBBINS with a
  loud yell rushes out D. in F. AUTOMATON knocks furniture about, etc.,
  and goes into china cupboard. (He may throw a chair out of window
  first.) STELLA comes in L. to see his final exit. She then goes up,
  looks into china cupboard after him--then comes downstage, calling in
  fright:_)

STELLA. Help! Help! Help!

  (_JACK and JOBBINS bring WALTER on between them D. in F., and bring
  him down C., and MRS. ANDERSON enters L._)

WALTER. Let me go, let me go, I say!

STELLA. Jack, you’ve got the wrong man!

  (_They release him._)

MRS. ANDERSON. There’s a telegrapheram, sir; is it for you or your twin?

JACK (_snatches it and reads_). From Mrs. Everest--“Potterfield fell
out of his dogcart and broke his leg. The wedding is postponed.”

STELLA. Postponed!

JACK. Congratulate you, old chap (_shaking hands_). Your fortune’s safe.

  (_Noise off and lights down as:_)

WALTER. Hush, hush! all of you. It’s coming out to die!

  (_STELLA hides on floor front of sofa L. MRS. ANDERSON hides on
  knees front of table R. JOBBINS stands by clock against wall up L.
  JACK sets cupboard door open with chair against it and then goes and
  stands in recess to R., side of same, and WALTER goes off to hide
  behind the curtain of recess L., side where there is a secret exit,
  so that he at once comes on as AUTOMATON from the china cupboard._)

  (_A man’s hand holds out the curtain behind which WALTER is supposed
  to be hiding. Dying scene for AUTOMATON. Jerky business, frightens
  JOBBINS who crouches back from it, then goes C., stoops and grows
  faint, has a spasm of strength and hurries to table R., frightening
  MRS. ANDERSON, who gets under table. It then leans dying against
  table, then has a fresh spasm, hurrying across to STELLA, who lies
  away from it on floor to avoid it._)

  (_Then up to cupboard door, which JACK set open with a chair.
  AUTOMATON dies with back to inside of door, pushing the chair clear
  of it in his spasm, business, finally shutting himself in as he
  collapses by letting the door close after him._)

  (_Red limes changing to green through above, and dark floats._)

  (_Lights up--all rise._)

STELLA (_cries_). Walter! (_Music of “Caressante.”_)

  (_WALTER comes out from behind curtain L. and down to STELLA C., takes
  her in his arms._)

WALTER. It’s Walter this time, and if you want proof, open the cupboard
and you’ll find all that remains of


THE ELECTRIC MAN.


CURTAIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Charles Hannan’s one act plays, “The Setting of the Sun,” “The New
  Groom,” “Richard Wye,” “The Gipsy,” “A Fragment,” “The Clock,” “The
  Lily of the Field,” may also be obtained from Messrs. SAMUEL FRENCH,
  LTD.

[Illustration: BUTLER & TANNER

THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS ·· FROME ··]




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Electric Man, by Charles Hannan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ELECTRIC MAN ***

***** This file should be named 61142-0.txt or 61142-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/1/4/61142/

Produced by Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

