Project Gutenberg's Catalogue of British Columbia Birds, by Francis Kermode

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Catalogue of British Columbia Birds

Author: Francis Kermode

Release Date: August, 2004 [EBook #6329]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on November 27, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRITISH COLUMBIA BIRDS ***




Produced by Karen Fabrizius, David Starner
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




Catalogue of British Columbia Birds.

PROVINCIAL MUSEUM, VICTORIA B. C.




PREFACE.


The present list is intended to include all birds which have been so
far proven to occur in British Columbia.

I am fully aware of its incompleteness, and very much regret much of
its lack of more definite information regarding the distribution of
certain species, and with regard to that portion of the Province in
north and northeastern interior, which, I have no doubt, is a valuable
field for work.

Since the publication of the list of British Columbia birds in 1898 by
the late John Fannin, which contained 339 species and sub-species, and
with the information to hand, enables me to add to this 24.

I wish to extend my thanks especially to the following constant
observers for more or less extended local lists, notes and
specimens:--A. C. Brooks, Chilliwhack, Okanagan and Cariboo; Rev.
J. H. Keen, Queen Charlotte Islands and Metlakatla; Thos. Kermode,
William Head Quarantine Station; E. P. Venables, Yernon; Chas. de
Blois Green, Fairview and Keremeos.

I have also obtained valuable information from the check-list
published by the late John Fannin.

  FRANCIS KERMODE,
  _Curator Provincial Museum_.

_Victoria, B. C., August, 1904_.




Order PYGOPODES. Diving birds.

Family PODICIPEDIDÆ. Grebes.

ÆCHMOPHORUS Coues.

1. Western Grebe.

  _Æchmophorus occidentalis_ (Lawr.).

A common winter resident along the coast of Vancouver Island and
Mainland. Mr. Brooks says a few remain all winter at Okanagan Lake.

COLYMBUS Linnæus.

2. American Red-necked Grebe. "Holboell's Grebe."

  _Colymbus holboelli_ (Reinh.).

A common winter resident along the coast of Vancouver Island and
Mainland. Winter resident on Okanagan Lake. (_Brooks_.) Not common at
Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.) Breeds on many of the lakes along the
Cariboo Road above Clinton. (_Fannin_.)

3. Horned Grebe.

  _Colymbus auritus_ (Linn.).

A common winter resident on the coast, and very common in the straits
near Victoria, in April. Brooks reports it at Okanagan Lake all winter.
Breeds on the lakes from Okanagan to Dense Lake. (_Fannin_.) Rare at
Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

4. American Eared Grebe.

  _Colymbus nigricollis californicus_ (Heerm.).

Taken at Kamloops, June, 1889. (_Spreadborough_.) Found breeding on
lakes at Kamloops; Catalogue of Canadian Birds. (_Macoun_.)

PODILYMBUS Lesson.

5. Pied-billed Grebe.

  _Podilymbus podiceps_ (Linn.).

Common resident on Vancouver Island; it breeds on lakes close to
Victoria. Common resident on Island and Mainland; breeds throughout
its range. (_Fannin_.)


Family GAVIIDÆ Loons.

GAVIA Forster.

6. Great Northern Diver. Loon.

  _Gavia imber_ (Gunn.).

Common resident throughout the Province; breeds on Vancouver Island
and Mainland.

7. Black-throated Loon.

  _Gavia arcticus_ (Linn.).

Taken at Burrard Inlet (_Fannin_), and at Dease Lake, Cassiar, by
James Porter.

8. Pacific Loon.

  _Gavia pacificus_ (Lawr.).

Not common; one specimen taken at Comox by W. B. Anderson, and at
Chilliwhack by Brooks; Victoria, May 13th, 1904, by Fred. Foster.

9. Red-throated Loon.

  _Gavia lumme_ (Gunn.).

I found this species quite common on Barkley Sound, V. I., April 19th,
1894, and fairly common near Esquimalt. Mr. Brooks reports it at
Chilliwhack.


Family ALCIDÆ. Auks, Murres and Puffins.

LUNDA Pallas.

10. Tufted Puffin.

  _Lunda cirrhata_ (Pall.).

Common along the coast of Vancouver Island, Queen Charlotte Islands
and Mainland; breeds on Bare Island, near Sidney, B. C.

FRATERCULA Brisson.

11. Horned Puffin.

  _Fratercula corniculata_ (Naum.).

Rare at Massett, Queen Charlotte Islands. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

CERORHINCA Bonaparte.

12. Rhinoceros Auklet.

  _Cerorhinca monocerata_ (Pall.).

Coasts of Vancouver Island and Mainland. Breeds on islands in Gulf of
Georgia.

PTYCHORAMPHUS Brandt.

13. Cassin's Auklet.

  _Ptychorampus aleuticus_ (Pall.).

The entire coast line of the Province and West Coast of Vancouver
Island. (_Fannin_.) This species was seen in the Gulf of
Georgia, between Salt Spring Island and Nanaimo, May 7th, 1887.
(_Macoun_.)

SYNTHLIBORAMPUS Brandt.

14. Ancient Murrelet.

  _Synthliborampus antiquus_ (Gmel.).

Not common. West Coast of Vancouver Island and taken in the Straits,
near Victoria. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it rare on Queen Charlotte
Islands.

BRACHYRAMPHUS Brandt.

15. Marbled Murrelet.

  _Brachyramphus marmoratus_ (Gmel.).

An abundant resident along the coast of British Columbia; have taken
it at Skidegate, Queen Charlotte Islands, in August, 1895. Rare at
Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.) Breeds on Vancouver Island, and
on some of the smaller islands in the Gulf of Georgia, and along many
of the inlets of the Mainland. (_Fannin_.)

CEPPHUS Pallas.

16. Pigeon Guillemot.

  _Cepphus columba_ (Pall.).

An abundant resident along the coast from Race Rocks to Alaska, and
quite common in Skidegate Inlet, Q. C. I., August, 1895. Breeds
throughout its range.

URIA Brisson.

17. California Murre, Guillemot.

  _Uria troile californica_ (Bryant).

A resident along the coast of Vancouver Island and Mainland. Breeds on
West Coast of Vancouver Island.




Order LONGIPENNES. Long-winged Swimmers.

Family STERCORARIIDÆ. Skuas and Jaegers.

STERCORARIUS Brisson.

18. Pomarine Jaeger.

  _Stercorarius pomariuus_ (Temm.).

One specimen taken near Victoria, October 22nd, 1898.

19. Parasitic Jaeger.

  _Stercorarius parasiticus_ (Linn.).

One specimen taken at Victoria by Wm. L. Gilchrist, November, 1897.
Another specimen was taken at Comox by A. C. Brooks, September 12th,
1903.

20. Long-tailed Jaeger.

  _Stercorarius longicaudus_ (Vieill.).

Once shot and several times seen at Sumas Lake, September, 1890.
(_Brooks_).


Family LARIDÆ. The Gulls and Terns.

PAGOPHILA Kaup.

21. Ivory Gull. Snow Gull.

  _Pagophila alba_ (Gunn.).

One specimen shot at Dease Lake, Cassiar, by James Porter, September,
1889. Another specimen was shot at Okanagan Lake in November, 1897, by
Mr. J. T. Studley, and presented to the Museum. Mr. A. C. Brooks also
reports it from Okanagan.

RISSA Stephens.

22. Pacific Kittiwake.

  _Rissa tridactyla pollicaris_ (Ridgw.).

Taken near Discovery Island, January, 1896, by W. Lindley, and at
Queen Charlotte Islands by Dr. C. F. Newcombe, September, 1895.

LARUS Linnæus.

23. Glaucous-winged Gull.

  _Larus glaucesceus_ (Naum.).

An abundant resident on the coast; breeds on some of the islands in
the Gulf of Georgia. Mr. Brooks reports it from Okanagan Lake.

24. Western Gull.

  _Larus occidentalis_ (Aud.).

An abundant resident on the coast during the winter months. Taken at
Chilliwhack. (_A. C. Brooks_.) Breeds in Similkameen Valley.
(_Fannin_.)

25. American Herring Gull.

  _Larus argentatus smithsonianus_ (Coues.).

An abundant resident on the coast. It breeds on the coast and in the
interior of Mainland. Common at Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)
Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)

26. California Gull.

  _Larus californicus_ (Lawr.).

A common winter resident on the coast. Common in the Lower Fraser
Valley and on the Okanagan Lake in winter. (_Brooks_.)

27. Ring-billed Gull.

  _Larus delawarensis_ (Ord.).

Common along the coast of Vancouver Island and Mainland. Common in
winter at Okanagan Lake and Chilliwhack. (_Brooks_.) Breeds in
the Interior, especially to the northward. (_Fannin_.)

28. Short-billed Gull.

  _Larus brachyrhynchus_ (Rich.).

Common winter resident along the coast of Vancouver Island and
Mainland. Common in Lower Fraser Valley. (_Brooks_.) During the
early part of May, 1891, I saw quite a number on the lakes of the
Cariboo District, where it probably breeds. (_Fannin_.)

29. Heermann's Gull. White-headed Gull.

  _Larus heermanni_ (Cass.).

Common along the southern coast of Vancouver Island during July and
August. Taken at William Head in full plumage, June 28th, 1904, by
Thos. Kermode.

30. Bonaparte's Gull.

  _Larus philadelphia_ (Ord.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province, and found in great
numbers about the inlets and rivers in March and April; it breeds in
the interior of the Province. I have also seen it on the coast in June
and July.

XEMA Leach.

31. Sabine's Gull.

  _Xema sabinii_ (Sab.).

Taken at Okanagan Lake, September 9th, 1897. (_Brooks_.)

STERNA Linnæus.

32. Common Tern.

  _Sterna hirundo_ (Linn.).

One specimen shot at Cowichan Gap by R. D. McClure, September 15th,
1896, and presented to the Museum.

33. Arctic Tern.

  _Sterna paradisæa_ (Brunn.).

From Dease Lake south, through the interior of the Mainland to
Okanagan Lake. Two specimens--one taken at Dease Lake by James Porter,
and another shot at Okanagan Lake by A. C. Brooks, September, 1807.

HYDROCHELIDON Boie.

34. Black Tern.

  _Hydrochelidon nigra surinamensis_ (Gmel.).

Not common. I observed it at Okanagan, June, 1895. Taken at Sumas and
Okanagan Lake by A. C. Brooks, Burrard Inlet, Eraser River and
interior of Mainland. (_Fannin_.)




Order TUBINARES. Tube-nosed Swimmers.

Family DIOMEDEIDÆ. Albatrosses.

DIOMEDEA Linnæus.

35. Black-footed Albatross.

  _Diomedea nigripes_ (Aud.).

West Coast of Vancouver Island. (_Fannin_.) Rare at Queen
Charlotte Islands. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.) One specimen taken near
Nanaimo, June 3th, 1904.

36. Short-tailed Albatross.

  _Diomedea albatrus_ (Pall.)

In April, 1894, I found this species quite common in the Pacific
Ocean, near Cape Beale.

Tolerably common on both coasts of Vancouver Island, but more abundant
on the West Coast; a few have been taken in the straits off Victoria
Harbour. (_Fannin_.)


Family PROCELLARIIDÆ. Fulmars & Shearwaters.

FULMARUS Stephens.

37. Pacific Fulmar.

  _Fulmarus glacialis glupischa_ (Stejn.).

One specimen taken at Chemainus, Vancouver Island, November, 1895.
(_Fannin_.)

PUFFINUS Brisson.

38. Black-vented Shearwater.

  _Puffinus opisthomelas_ (Coues).

Not common; four specimens taken off Albert Head, October 24th, 1891.

39. Dark-bodied Shearwater.

  _Puffinus griseus_ (Gmel.).

During the fall of 1895 Dr. C. F. Newcombe found this species common
on the West Coast of Queen Charlotte Islands. Since then one was
picked up dead on the beach near Victoria.

40. Slender-billed Shearwater.

  _Puffinus tenuirostris_ (Temm.).

Not common; one specimen shot at William Head and presented to the
Museum by T. Kermode, February 23rd, 1904.

OCEANODROMA Reichenbach.

41. Gray Fork-tailed Petrel.

  _Oceanodroma furcata_ (Gmel.).

Found along both coasts of Vancouver Island, but more common on the
Pacific Coast; a few have been taken in the Straits near Victoria.
Very rare at Metlakatla; one picked up exhausted.
(_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

42. Leach's Fork-tailed Petrel. White-rumped Petrel.

  _Oceanodroma leucorrhoa_ (Vieill.) Coues.

West Coast of Vancouver Island. Four specimens taken in Hecate Strait,
July, 1904. One specimen found dead on beach off Beacon Hill,
Victoria, November, 1893.




Order STEGANOPODES. Totipalmate Swimmers.

Family PHALACROCORACIDÆ. Cormorants.

PHALACROCORAX Brisson.

43. White-crested Cormorant.

  _Phalacrocorax dilophus cincinnatus_ (Brandt).

Common on both coasts of Vancouver Island and coast of Mainland, from
Race Rocks to Alaska.

44. Brandt's Cormorant. Pencilled Cormorant.

  _Phalacrocorax penicillatus_ (Brandt).

Two specimens were killed in the Straits, near Victoria, by D. E.
Campbell, April 19th, 1897. Later in the month another specimen was
found on the beach at Beacon Hill.

45. Violet-green Cormorant.

  _Phalacrocorax pelagicus robustus_ (Ridgw.).

This is the most abundant Cormorant in the Province, and is found
along both coasts of the Island, and has been taken as far north as
Port Simpson. Breeds on islands close to Sidney Island. Common at
Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)


Family PELECANIDÆ. Pelicans.

PELECANUS Linnæus.

46. American White Pelican.

  _Pelecanus erythrorhynchos_ (Gmel.).

Not common. Four specimens taken--Sicamous, October, 1890; Alexandria
Bridge, September, 1895; Tranquille, August, 1897; Comox, September
8th, 1900. Mr. Brooks reports it from Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Said
to breed in the Chilcotin country. (_Fannin_.)

47. California Brown Pelican.

  _Pelecanus californicus_ (Ridgw.).

Not common. One specimen in the Museum killed at Race Rocks, January,
1897. Seen at Sumas Lake. (_Brooks_.)




Order ANSERES. Lamellirostral Swimmers.

Family ANATIDÆ. Mergansers, Ducks, Geese and Swans.

MERGANSER Brisson.

48. American Merganser.

  _Merganser americanus_ (Cass.).

Found throughout the Province, have taken it on West Coast of
Vancouver Island in May; also on Queen Charlotte Islands in July,
1895, I took four young birds. Brooks reports it found on Okanagan
Lake all winter.

49. Red-breasted Merganser.

  _Menganser serrator_ (Linn.).

Found distributed throughout the Province. I saw them at Sumas Lake
May 17th, 1904. Rev. J. H. Keen says common at Metlakahtla,
Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)

LOPHODYTES Reichenbach.

50. Hooded Merganser.

  _Lophodytes cucullatus_ (Linn.).

This species is common throughout the Province and on the Pacific
Coast. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

ANAS Linnæus.

51. Mallard.

  _Anas boschas_ (Linn.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province; breeds in suitable
localities throughout its range.

CHAULELASMUS Bonaparte.

52. Gadwall. Gray Duck.

  _Chaulelasmus strepera_ (Linn.).

Not common; a few have been taken near Victoria. Mr. Brooks reports it
from Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

MARECA Stephens.

53. European Widgeon.

  _Mareca penelope_ (Linn.).

Rare. Two specimens, one taken near Victoria February 9th, 1899, and
another near Saanich.

54. American Widgeon. Baldpate.

  _Mareca americana_ (Gmel.).

A common winter resident on the coast. Brooks reports it from
Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Breeds on lakes on Cariboo Road above
Clinton. (_Fannin_.)

NETTION Kaup.

55. Green-winged Teal.

  _Nettion carolinensis_ (Gmel.).

An abundant resident, Breeds in the interior of the Mainland. Common
on the coast throughout the winter. Rare on Queen Charlotte Islands.
(_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

QUERQUEDULA Stephens.

56. Blue-winged Teal.

  _Querquedula discors_ (Linn.).

Not common on the coast; a few are taken every year. Taken at
Chilliwhack. (_Brooks_.)

57. Cinnamon Teal.

  _Querquedula cyanoptera_ (Vieill.).

A summer visitor in the interior of the Province. Brooks has taken it
at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

SPATULA Boie.

58. Shoveller. Spoon-bill.

  _Spatula clypeata_ (Linn.).

A common resident on the Mainland, rarely met with on Vancouver
Island. Brooks says common resident in Lower Fraser Valley about
Sumas Lake, has also taken it on Okanagan.

DAFILA Stephens.

59. Pintail. Sprigtail.

  _Dafila acuta_ (Linn.).

An abundant winter resident on the coast. Breeds in the interior of
the Mainland.

AIX Boie.

60. Wood Duck.

  _Aix spona_ (Linn.).

Not common. A summer resident on Island and Mainland. Brooks has taken
it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

AYTHYA Boie.

61. Red-head. Pochard.

  _Aythya americana_ (Eyt.).

A winter resident on the coast, but nowhere common; a few are taken
every season. Fannin found it breeding on the lakes along the Cariboo
Road.

62. Canvas-back Duck.

  _Aythya vallisneria_ (Wils.).

A winter resident on the coast. Brooks has taken it on Okanagan Lake.
I found them in pairs on the lakes near 108-Mile House, Cariboo Road,
in April and May, 1891, where I was told they breed. (_Fannin_).

63. American Scaup Duck. Blue-bill.

  _Aythya marila_ (Linn.).

An abundant winter resident on the coast. Breeds in the interior of
Mainland.

64. Lesser Scaup Duck.

  _Aythya affinis_ (Eyt.).

Not common on the coast. Fannin has taken it in May near Ashcroft, and
Brooks has seen it all winter at Okanagan.

65. Ring-necked Duck.

  _Aythya collaris_ (Donov.).

Not common. A few have been taken on Vancouver Island. Mr. Brooks says
common in Lower Fraser Valley, and is found all winter on Okanagan
Lake.

CLANGULA Leach.

66. American Golden-eye. Whistler.

  _Clangula clangula americana_ (Faxon.)

A common winter resident on the coast. Fannin says breeds in interior.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

67. Barrow's Golden-eye.

  _Clangula islandica_ (Gmel.).

Not common. It winters on the coast; a few have been taken on
Vancouver Island. Brooks has taken it at Okanagan. Fannin found it
plentiful on the lakes along the Cariboo Road, May, 1891.

CHARITONETTA Stejneger.

68. Buffle-head. Butter-ball.

  _Charitonetta albeola_ (Linn.).

An abundant winter resident on the coast. Breeds in the interior of
the Mainland. Common at Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

HARELDA Stephens.

69. Long-tailed Duck. Old Squaw.

  _Harelda hyemalis_ (Linn.).

Common; the coasts of Vancouver Island and Mainland. Brooks has taken
it at Chilliwhack. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it common at Metlakatla.

HISTRIONICUS Lesson.

70. Harlequin Duck.

  _Histrionicus histrionicus_ (Linn.).

A common resident on the coast. I found it breeding at Bear River,
Vancouver Island, May, 1894. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack. Rare
at Queen Charlotte Islands. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

OIDEMIA Fleming.

71. American Black Scoter.

  _Oidemia americana_ (Swains.).

Not common; has been taken at Victoria and Port Simpson. Fannin saw a
small flock on a lake near 108-Mile House, Cariboo Road, 10th May,
1891. Fairly common at Matlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

72. White-winged Scoter.

  _Oidemia deglandi_ (Bonap.).

An abundant resident, and is found on the coast throughout the year.
Brooks reports it from Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Rev. J. H. Keen says
is common at Metlakatla.

73. Surf Scoter. Sea Coot.

  _Oidemia perspicillata_ (Linn.).

Abundant resident along the coasts of Vancouver Island and Mainland.
Found at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.) Common at
Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

ERISMATURA Bonaparte.

74. Ruddy Duck.

  _Erismatura jamaicensis_ (Gmel.).

Not common on the Coast; a few are taken in the winter. Fannin found
it breeding in the lakes along the Cariboo Road, May, 1891. Brooks has
seen it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

CHEN Boie.

75. Lesser Snow Goose.

  _Chen hyperborea_ (Pall.).

A winter resident on the Coast. Brooks has seen it at Chilliwhack.
During some winters large numbers congregate off the mouth of Fraser
River. (_Fannin_.)

76. Ross's Snow Goose.

  _Chen rossii_ (Cassin.).

This is a rare bird in B. C. One specimen taken at Comox, January,
1894; another was taken at Kuper Island, April, 1895.

ANSER Brisson.

77. American White-fronted Goose.

  _Anser albifrons gambeli_ (Hartl.).

Abundant on the Coast in winter. Breeds both on Island and Mainland.
The young have been taken on Cowichan Lake. (_Fannin_.) Brooks
has taken it at Sumas and Okanagan Lakes. Common at Metlakatla.
(_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

BRANTA Scopoli.

78. Canada Goose.

  _Branta canadensis_ (Linn.).

An abundant winter resident on the Coast. Breeds in the interior of
the Mainland; the eggs have been taken at Penticton by C. DeBlois
Green.

79. Hutchin's Goose.

  _Branta canadensis hutchinsii_ (Rich.).

Abundant in the spring and fall migrations, and winters on the Coast.

80. White-cheeked Goose.

  _Branta canadensis occidentalis_ (Baird).

Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

81. Cackling Goose.

  _Branta canadensis minima_ (Ridgw.).

Winter resident on the Coast; has been taken at Elk Lake, near
Victoria. Brooks reports it from Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

82. Brant.

  _Branta bernicla glaucogastra_ (Brehm.).

Two specimens shot at Comox by A. C. Brooks, January 10th, 1904.

83. Black Brant.

  _Branta nigricans_ (Lawr.).

An abundant winter resident on the Coast. In April, 1894. I saw them
in great numbers off Barkley Sound migrating north.

PHILACTE.

84. Emperor Goose.

  _Philacate canagica_ (Sevast.).

One specimen shot at Chemainus, December, 1894.

OLOR Wagler.

85. Whistling Swan.

  _Olor columbianus_ (Ord.).

A winter resident on Vancouver Island and southern Mainland. Mr.
Brooks records it from Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

86. Trumpeter Swan.

  _Olor buccinator_ (Rich.).

I have only seen this bird at Deaso Lake, Cassiar. (_Fannin_.)
Mr. Brooks has found it at Sumas and Okanagan.




Order HERODIONES. Herons, Ibises, etc.

Family IBIDIDÆ. Ibises.

PLEGADIS Kaup.

87. White-faced Glossy Ibis.

  _Plegadis guarauna_ (Linn.).

Only two specimens known to be taken in the Province, one on Salt
Spring Island, the other at mouth of Fraser River. Check List of
B. C. Birds, 1891. (_Fannin_.)


Family ARDEIDÆ. Herons and Bitterns.

BOTAURUS Hermann.

88. American Bittern.

  _Botaurus lentiginosus_ (Montag.).

Common throughout the greater portion of the Province. Breeds both
east and west of Cascades.

ARDEA Linnæus.

89. Great Blue Heron.

  _Ardea herodias_ (Linn.).

A common resident on the coast, and is quite common at Sumas Lake and
Okanagan. Breeds throughout its range.

90. Northwest Coast Heron.

  _Ardea herodias fannini_ (Chapman).

In August, 1895, I found this form, now named after the late John
Fannin by Frank M. Chapman, quite common at Skidegate, Queen Charlotte
Islands.

EGRETTA Forester.

91. Snowy Heron.

  _Egretta candidissima_ (Gmel.).

Rare in British Columbia. Two specimens collected at Burrard Inlet,
May, 1879. (_Fannin_.) One specimen is in the Museum.




Order PALUDICOLÆ. Cranes, Rails, etc.

Family GRUIDÆ. Cranes.

GRUS Pallas.

92. Little Brown Crane.

  _Grus canadensis_ (Linn.).

Common, during migrations, throughout the Province.

93. Sandhill Crane.

  _Grus mexicana_ (Mull.).

Common throughout the Province; it breeds in the interior of Mainland;
numbers pass over Victoria in the spring and autumn migrations.


Family RALLIDÆ. Rails and Coots.

RALLUS Linnæus.

94. Virginia Rail.

  _Rallus virginianus_ (Linn.).

Tolerably common on Island and Mainland; breeds close to Victoria.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

PORZANA Vieillot.

95. Carolina Rail. Sora.

  _Porzana Carolina_ (Linn.).

Found on Vancouver Island and Mainland. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it
very rare on Queen Charlotte Islands. Common east of Cascades.
(_Fannin_.)

FULICA Linnæus.

96. American Coot. Mud-hen.

  _Fulica americana_ (Gmel.).

A common resident on Island and Mainland; breeds throughout its range.




Order LIMICIOLÆ. Shore Birds.

Family PHALAROPODIDÆ. Phalaropes.

CRYMOPHILUS Vieillot.

97. Red Phalarope.

  _Crymophilus fulicarius_ (Linn.).

Taken at Clover Point, near Victoria, during migration.

PHALAROPUS Brisson.

98. Northern Phalarope.

  _Phalaropus lobatus_ (Linn.).

Abundant along the coast of Island and Mainland in the spring and
autumn. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Fannin has
taken it at Burrard Inlet in July.

STEGANOPUS. Vieillot.

99. Wilson's Phalarope.

  _Steganopus tricolor_ (Vieill.).

Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.


Family SCOLOPACIDÆ. Snipes, Sand-pipers, Etc.

GALLINAGO Leach.

100. Wilson's Snipe.

  _Gallinago delicata_ (Ord.)

Common throughout the Province on Island and Mainland; breeds in the
interior. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it common at Metlakatla.

MACRORHAMPHUS Leach.

101. Long-billed Dowitcher. Red-breasted Snipe.

  _Macrorhamphus scolopaceus_ (Say.).

Tolerably abundant throughout the Province. I found it quite common at
Clayoquot, West Coast Vancouver Island, in May, 1894. Fannin says
breeds in the interior. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack. Fairly
common at Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

MICROPALAMA Baird.

102. STILT SANDPIPER.

  _Micropalama himantopus_ (Bonap.).

Taken at Chilliwhack, August 19th, 1899, by A. C. Brooks.

TRINGA Linnæus.

103. KNOT. ROBIN SNIPE.

  _Tringa canutus_ (Linn.).

Abundant during migrations, chiefly along the coast. (_Fannin_.)
Taken at Chilliwhack. (_Brooks_.)

ACTODROMAS Kaup.

104. SHARP-TAILED SANDPIPER.

  _Actodromas acuminata_ (Horsf.).

Two specimens taken at Massett, Queen Charlotte Islands, December
27th, 1897, by Rev. J. H. Keen.

105. PECTORAL SANDPIPER.

  _Actodromas maculata_ (Vieill.).

Not common; taken along the coast during migrations. Brooks has taken
it at Chillihwack and Okanagan.

106. BAIRD'S SANDPIPER.

  _Actodromas bairdii_ (Coues.).

Distributed along the coast of Island and Mainland, Rev. J. H. Keen
reports it rare at Metlakatla. Taken at Chilliwhack and Okanagan
(_Brooks_); and at Clover Point, Victoria
(_E. M. Anderson_).

107. LEAST SANDPIPER.

  _Actodromas minutilla_ (Vieill.).

Common along the coast of Island and Mainland. I found it common at
Clayoquot in May, 1894; I have also taken it near Victoria in July.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Fannin has taken it
at 108-Mile House, Cariboo Road, in May.

PELIDNA Cuvier.

108. RED-BACKED SANDPIPER.

  _Pelidna alpina sakhalina_ (Vieillot).

Common in the spring and autumn migration along the coast of Island
and Mainland. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack.

EREUNETES Illiger.

109. SEMIPALMATED SANDPIPER.

  _Ereunetes pusillus_ (Linn.).

Not uncommon in migration along the Coast. Chilliwhack and Okanagan.
(_Brooks_.) Common at Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

110. WESTERN SEMIPALMATED SANDPIPER.

  _Ereunetes pusillus occidenlcdis_ (Lawr.).

Abundant in the fall along the Coast. I also found it very common at
Clayoquot, May, 1894, and have taken it near Victoria in July. Brooks
has taken it at Chilliwhack.

CALIDRIS Cuvier.

111. SANDERLING.

  _Calidris arenaria_ (Linn.).

Not common; several have been taken near Victoria by A. H. Maynard.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack. Fairly common at Metlakatla.
(_Rev J. H. Keen_.)

LIMOSA Brisson.

112. MARBLED GODWIT.

  _Limosa fedoa_ (Linn.).

The whole of British Columbia; breeds chiefly east of Cascades.
(_Fannin_.) Port Simpson. (_W. B. Anderson_.)

TOTANUS Bechstein.

113. GREATER YELLOW-LEGS.

  _Totanus melanoleucus_ (Gmel.).

Common along the coast in winter; have taken it at Clayoquot in May.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. I found it breeding
around the lakes at Clinton, May, 1891. (_Fannin_.)

114. LESSER YELLOW-LEGS.

  _Totanus flavipes_ (Gmel.).

Tolerably common through the Province; winters on the coast. Brooks
has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

HELODROMAS Kaup.

115. SOLITARY SANDPIPER.

  _Helodromas solitarius_ (Wils.).

Found throughout the Province. Taken at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.
(_Brooks_).

116. WESTERN SOLITARY SANDPIPER.

  _Helodromas solitarius cinnamomeus_ (Brewster).

Taken at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_).

SYMPHEMIA Rafinesque.

117. WESTERN WILLET.

  _Symphemia semipalmata inornata_ (Brewster).

One specimen shot at Clover Point, near Victoria, August 18th, 1898,
by Mr. J. Henley.

HETERACTITIS Stejneger.

118. WANDERING TATLER.

  _Heteractitis incanus_ (Gmel.).

Tolerably common along the coast of Island and Mainland. I took it at
Clayoquot, May, 1894, and at Skidegate, Queen Charlotte Islands,
August 5th, 1895.

BARTRAMIA Lesson.

119. BARTRAMIAN SANDPIPER.

  _Bartramia longicauda_ (Bechst.).

One specimen shot at Comox, August 20th, 1895, by W. B. Anderson.
Another was taken at l50-Mile House, Cariboo Road, May 16th, 1901, by
A. C. Brooks.

TRYNGITES Cabanis.

120. BUFF-BREASTED SANDPIPER.

  _Tryngites subruficollis_ (Vieill.).

Not common. Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

ACTITIS Illiger.

121. SPOTTED SANDPIPER.

  _Actitis macularia_ (Linn.).

This bird is found along the entire coast; I have taken it at
Clayoquot Vancouver Island, and at Skidegate, Queen Charlotte Islands,
July 26th, 1895. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

NUMENIUS Brisson.

122. LONG-BILLED CURLEW.

  _Numenius longirostris_ (Wils.).

A few specimens have been taken on the coast, but is to be more
frequently met with in the interior of the Mainland, south through the
Okanagan.

123. HUDSONIAN CURLEW.

  _Numenius hudsonicus_ (Lath.).

Not common, but distributed along the coast of Island and Mainland. I
have taken it at Clayoquot in May, 1894. W. B. Andersen has taken it
at Port Simpson, and J. Maynard at Cadboro Bay, near Victoria.


Family CHARADRIIDÆ. Plovers, Etc.

CHARADRIUS Linnæus.

124. BLACK-BELLIED PLOVER.

  _Charadrius squatarola_ (Linn.).

Abundant during migrations along the coast. Brooks has taken it at
Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

125. AMERICAN GOLDEN PLOVER.

  _Charadrius dominicus_ (Mull.).

Common on the coast during migrations. Brooks has taken it at
Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it common at
Metlakatla. W. B. Anderson has taken it at Port Simpson.

ÆGIALITIS Boie.

126. KILLDEER PLOVER.

  _Ægialitis vocifera_ (Linn.).

Found throughout the Province; occasionally on the coast in winter.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

127. SEMIPALMATED PLOVER.

  _Ægialitis semipalmata_ (Bonap.).

Not common. I took two specimens on the West Coast, Vancouver
Island--one at Ucluelet, April 28th, 1894, the other at Clayoquot,
May, 1894. A. H. Maynard shot one at Cadboro Bay, Victoria.


Family APHRIZIDÆ. Surf-birds and Turnstones.

APHRIZA Audubon.

128. SURF-BIRD.

  _Aphriza virgata_ (Gmel.).

Not uncommon along the entire coast line of the Province. I found it
quite common at Clayoquot, May, 1894. It has been taken at Port
Simpson by W. B. Anderson.

ARENARIA Brisson.

129. TURNSTONE.

  _Arenaria interpres_ (Linn.).

Along the entire coast line, but not common. It has been taken at Port
Simpson and Sidney Island. Brooks has taken it at Sumas Lake.

130. BLACK TURNSTONE.

  _Arenaria melanocephala_ (Vig.).

Common along the entire coast of the Province. I have taken it at
Clayquot in May, 1894, and I found it very common at Skidegate, Queen
Charlotte Islands, in July, 1895, and it is found near Victoria
throughout the winter.


Family HÆMATOPODIDÆ. Oyster-Catchers.

HÆMATOPUS Linnæus.

131. BLACK OYSTER-CATCHER.

  _Hæmatopus bachmani_ (Aud.).

Abundant along the entire coast of Island and Mainland. Breeds
throughout its range. Common on Queen Charlotte Islands, at Skidegate.




Order GALLINÆ. Gallinaceous Birds.

Family TETRAONIDÆ. Grouse, Partridges, Etc.

OREORTYX Baird.

132. MOUNTAIN PARTRIDGE.

  _Oreortyx pictus_ (Dougl.).

Common on Vancouver Island. Introduced from California.

LOPHORTYX Bonaparte.

133. CALIFORNIA PARTRIDGE.

  _Lophortyx californicus_ (Shaw.).

Common on Vancouver Island. Introduced from California.

DENDRAGAPUS Elliot.

134. SOOTY GROUSE.

  _Dendragapus obscurus fuliginosus_ (Ridgw.).

Abundant west of Cascade Mountains, including Vancouver Island, Queen
Charlotte Islands, and all the larger islands along the coast.

135. RICHARDSON'S GROUSE.

  _Dendragapus obscurus richardsonii_ (Dougl.).

An abundant resident east of Cascade Mountains to Rocky Mountains.

CANACHITES Stejneger.

136. FRANKLIN'S GROUSE.

  _Canachites franklinii_ (Dougl.).

An abundant resident throughout the wooded portion of the interior
east of the Cascade Mountains, from Okanagan to Cassiar.

BONASA Stephens.

137. CANADIAN RUFFED GROUSE.

  _Bonasa umbellus togata_ (Linn.).

An abundant resident east of and including the Cascade Mountains.
Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

138. GRAY RUFFED GROUSE.

  _Bonasa umbellus umbelloides_ (Dougl.).

Rocky Mountain District, Soda Creek and Beaver Pass. Check List of
B. C. Birds, 1898. (_Fannin_.) Okanagan, A. C. Brooks.

139. OREGON RUFFED GROUSE.

  _Bonasa umbellus sabini_ (Dougl.).

An abundant resident on Vancouver Island and all the larger islands of
the coast, and on the Mainland west of Cascade Mountains.

LAGOPUS Brisson.

140. WILLOW PTARMIGAN.

  _Lagopus lagopus_ (Linn.).

Northern portion of British Columbia, Dease Lake, Cassiar. (_James
Porter_.) Log Cabin, Atlin. (_Fletcher_ and
_Englehardt_.).

141. ROCK PTARMIGAN.

  _Lagopus rupestris_ (Gmel.).

Common on the summit of most of the mountains on the Mainland and
Vancouver Island. (_Fannin_.) Quite common at Atlin.

142. WHITE-TAILED PTARMIGAN.

  _Lagopus leucurus_ (Swains. & Rich.).

Found on the summit of most mountains on the Mainland except the Coast
Range. Taken at Okanagan. (_Brooks_.) Cassiar. (_James
Porter_.)

PEDIOECETES Baird.

143. COLUMBIAN SHARP-TAILED GROUSE. PRAIRIE CHICKEN.

  _Pedioecetes phasianellus columbianus_ (Ord.).

An abundant resident east of Cascade Range through the southern
portions of the Province. E. P. Venables reports it common near
Vernon.

CENTROCERCUS Swainson.

144. SAGE GROUSE.

  _Centrocercus urophasianus_ (Bonap.).

Three specimens taken by Mr. G. B. Martin at Osoyoos Lake in October,
1864. (Check List of B. C. Birds, 1891. _Fannin_.)


Family PHASIANIDÆ. Pheasants.

PHASIANUS Linnæus.

145. RING-NECKED PHEASANT.

  _Phasianus torquatus_ (Linn.).

Abundant on Vancouver Island and in the Lower Fraser River Valley and
other portions of the Mainland. Introduced from China; now thoroughly
naturalised.




Order COLUMBÆ. Pigeons.

Family COLUMBIDÆ. Pigeons.

COLUMBA Linnæus.

146. BAND-TAILED PIGEON.

  _Columba fasciata_ (Say.).

A common summer resident in the south-western portions of the Province
including Vancouver Island.

ECTOPISTES Swainson.

147. PASSENGER PIGEON.

  _Ectopistes migratorius_ (Linn.).

Mentioned in John Keast Lord's "Naturalist in British Columbia"
(1866). If it ever did occur here, it is now, without doubt,
extinct. (_Fannin_.)

ZENAIDURA Bonaparte.

148. MOURNING DOVE.

  _Zenaidura macroura_ (Linn.).

Not common on Vancouver Island. I found it quite common in the
Okanagan in June, 1895. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack. Rev. J. H.
Keen reports it rare at Metlakatla.




Order RAPTORES. Birds of Prey.

Family CATHARTIDÆ. American Vultures.

GYMNOGYPS Lesson.

149. CALIFORNIA VULTURE.

  _Gymnogyps californianus_ (Shaw.).

In September, 1880, I saw two of these birds at Burrard Inlet. It is
more than probable they are accidental visitants here. Lord says:
Mouth of Fraser River; seldom visits the Interior. (_Fannin_.)

CATHARTES Illeger.

150. TURKEY VULTURE.

  _Cathartes aura_ (Linn.).

Tolerably common on Vancouver Island and portions of the Mainland.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.


Family FALCONIDÆ. Falcons, Hawks, Eagles, etc.

CIRCUS Lacépède.

151. MARSH HAWK.

  _Circus hudsonius_ (Linn.).

Common on Vancouver Island and Mainland. Abundant on the Mainland.
Partially migratory; a few are found throughout the winter at
Ladners. (_Fannin_.) Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)

ACCIPITER Brisson.

152. SHARP-SHINNED HAWK.

  _Accipiter velox_ (Wils.).

Abundant on Vancouver Island and portions of the Mainland. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

153. COOPER'S HAWK.

  _Accipiter cooperii_ (Bonap.).

Found on Vancouver Island and Mainland; have taken it at Sicamous.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

154. AMERICAN GOSHAWK.

  _Accipiter atricapillus_ (Wils.).

Rather common in interior of Province. A few have been taken on
Vancouver Island. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

155. WESTERN GOSHAWK.

  _Accipiter atricapillus striatulus_ (Ridgw.).

Common throughout the Province. I found it very common at Skidegate,
Queen Charlotte Islands, in August, 1895.

BUTEO Cuvier.

156. WESTERN RED-TAILED HAWK.

  _Buteo borealis calurus_ (Cass.).

An abundant resident on Vancouver Island and coast of Mainland. Taken
at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.) Rare at Massett, Queen
Charlotte Islands. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

157. RED-BELLIED HAWK.

  _Buteo lineatus elegans_ (Cass.).

Not common. I have no record of it on Vancouver Island. It has been
taken at Burrard Inlet by J. Fannin, and at Chilliwhack by
A. C. Brooks.

158. SWAINSON'S HAWK.

  _Buteo swainsoni_ (Bonap.).

Not common on Vancouver Island; it has been taken at Victoria and
Union. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

ARCHIBUTEO Brehm.

159. AMERICAN ROUGH-LEGGED HAWK.

  _Archibuteo lagopus sancti-johannis_ (Gmel.).

Not common. Found on both Vancouver Island and Mainland. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

AQUILA Brisson.

160. GOLDEN EAGLE.

  _Aquila chrysaetos_ (Linn.).

Found throughout the entire Province. Rare on Vancouver Island. A
resident.

HALIÆETUS Savigny.

161. BALD EAGLE.

  _Haliæetus leucocephalus alascanus_ (C. H. Townsend).

An abundant resident throughout the entire Province, on Island and
Mainland. Breeds throughout its range. Common on Queen Charlotte
Islands.

FALCO Linnæus.

162. GYRFALCON.

  _Falco rusticolus gyrfalco_ (Linn.).

One specimen shot at Comox, October, 1894, by W. Harvey. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack.

163. PRAIRIE FALCON.

  _Falco mexicanus _(Schleg.).

Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks, and at Kamloops, November, 1894,
by W. Fortune.

164. DUCK HAWK.

  _Falco peregrinus anatum_ (Bonap.).

Apparently more common on the Mainland than Vancouver Island. Several
have been taken in the Okanagan Country.

165. PEALE'S FALCON.

  _Falco peregrinus pealei_ (Ridgw.).

Found chiefly along the coasts of Mainland and Vancouver
Island. Several specimens have been taken at Cadbora Bay, near
Victoria. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack. Rare at
Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

166. PIGEON HAWK.

  _Falco columbarius_ (Linn.).

Apparently more common east of the Coast Range. A few have been taken
on the Coast. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

167. BLACK MERLIN.

  _Falco columbarius suckleyi_ (Ridgw.).

Abundant; summer resident on Vancouver Island and portions of
Mainland. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

168. RICHARDSON'S MERLIN.

  _Falco richardsonii_ (Ridgw.).

Not common on Vancouver Island; a few specimens have been taken near
Victoria. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

169. DESERT SPARROW HAWK.

  _Falco spaverius phaloena_ (Lesson).

Abundant throughout the southern portion of Mainland, including
Vancouver Island, from the coast to Rocky Mountains.

PANDION Savigny.

170. AMERICAN OSPREY. FISH HAWK.

  _Pandion halioetus carolinensis_ (Gmel.).

Common throughout the Province, on Mainland and Island, including
Queen Charlotte Islands. Their nest is a huge heap of sticks, usually
on the broken top of a tree.


Family BUBONIDÆ. Horned Owls, etc.

ASIO Brisson.

171. AMERICAN LONG-EARED OWL.

  _Asio wilsonianus_ (Less.).

Not common; a few have been taken on Vancouver Island. Mr. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

172. SHORT-EARED OWL.

  _Asio accipitrinus_ (Pall.).

Common throughout the Province, on Island and Mainland; rather common
near Victoria throughout the winter.

SYRNIUM Sanigny.

173. NORTHERN SPOTTED OWL.

  _Syrnium occidentale caurinum_ (Merriam).

Rare resident at Chilliwhack and Mount Lehman (_Brooks_.) The
late John Fannin had this bird on his first list of B. C. birds, he
having taken it at Burrard Inlet some years ago, but in his lists of
1891 and 1898 he dropped it.

SCOTIAPTEX Swainson.

174. GREAT GREY OWL.

  _Scotiaptex nebulosa_ (Forster).

A rare bird in this Province; it has been taken at Vernon and
Stewart's Lake. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack.

CRYPTOGLAUX Richmond.

175. RICHARDSON'S OWL.

  _Cryptoglaux tengmalmi richardsoni_ (Bonaparte).

Taken at Okanagan by A. C. Brooks.

176. SAW-WHET OWL.

  _Cryptoglaux acadica_ (Gmel.).

Not common on Vancouver Island; several have been taken near this
city. Tolerably at Chilliwhack and common in winter at Okanagan.
(_Brooks_.)

176A. NORTH-WEST SAW-WHET OWL.

  _Cryptoglaux acadica scotæa_ (Osgood).

Queen Charlotte Islands.

MEGASCOPS Kaup.

177. KENNICOTT'S SCREECH OWL.

  _Megascops asio kennicottii_ (Elliot).

An abundant resident throughout the Province. Breeds in the
neighbourhood of Victoria.

178. MACFARLANE'S SCREECH OWL.

  _Megascops asio macfarlanei_ (Brewst.).

Southern portion of the Province, east of Cascade Mountains.

BUBO Dumeril.

179. GREAT HORNED OWL.

  _Bubo virginianus_ (Gmel.).

Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks, and near Victoria by John Hall,
November, 1896.

180. WESTERN HORNED OWL.

  _Bubo virginianus pallescens_ (Stone).

Common on Vancouver Island and Mainland. Taken at Chilliwhack and
Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)

181. ARCTIC HORNED OWL.

  _Bubo virginianus arcticus_ (Swains.).

One specimen taken near Victoria, November, 1896, by A. H. Maynard,
and at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

182. DUSKY HORNED OWL.

  _Bubo virginianus saturatus_ (Ridgw.).

An abundant resident in this Province; common on Vancouver Island.
Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

NYCTEA Stephens.

183. SNOWY OWL.

  _Nyctea nyctea_ (Linn.).

A resident in the northern portions of the Province, south in winter
to mouth of Fraser River, Chilliwhack and Okanagan, occasionally to
Vancouver Island. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it rare at Metlakahtla.

SURNIA Duméril.

184. American Hawk Owl.

  _Surnia ulula caparoch_ (Mull.).

Not common, but found throughout the southern part of the Province
from the Coast to Okanagan. Rare on Vancouver Island. It has been
taken at Victoria, Sardis, Grand Prairie and Vernon.

SPEOTYTO Gloger.

185. Burrowing Owl.

  _Speotyto cunicularia hypogæa_ (Bonap.).

Not common, but is found in suitable localities in the southern
portions of the Province from Chilliwhack to Okanagan. Mr. Brooks has
taken three specimens at Chilliwhack. Rare at Vernon.
(_E. P. Venables_.)

GLAUCIDIUM Boie.

186. Pygmy Owl.

  _Glaucidium gnoma_ (Wagl.).

Common throughout the Province. (_Fannin_.)

187. California Pygmy Owl.

  _Glaucidium gnoma californicum_ (Scl.).

Common throughout the southern portions of the Province, including
Vancouver Island.




Order COCCYGES. Cuckoos and Kingfishers.

Family CUCULIDÆ. Cuckoos.

COCCYZUS Vieillot.

188. Western Yellow-billed Cuckoo. California Cuckoo.

  _Coccyzus americanus occidentalis_ (Ridgw.).

A regular summer resident in the southwestern portions of the
Province. It breeds on Vancouver Island near Victoria. Mr. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack.


Family ALCEDINIDÆ. Kingfishers.

CERYLE Boie.

189. Belted Kingfisher.

  _Ceryle alcyon_ (LINN.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province, breeds throughout its
range.




Order PICI. Woodpeckers, Wrynecks, etc.

Family PICIDÆ. Woodpeckers.

DRYOBATES Boie.

190. Northern Hairy Woodpecker.

  _Dryobates villosus leucomelas_ (Bodd.).

Common resident on the Mainland east of Cascade Mountains. I found it
quite common at Sicamous, May, 1895. Mr. Brooks reports having taken
it several times at Chilliwhack.

191. Harris's Woodpecker.

  _Dryobates villosus harrisii_ (Aud.).

A common resident west of Coast Range, including Vancouver Island.

192. Cabanis's Woodpecker.

  _Dryobates villosus hyloscopus_ (Cab.).

Rocky Mountain district. Taken at Okanagan by A. C. Brooks.

193. Queen Charlotte Woodpecker.

  _Dryobates villosus picoideus_ (Osgood).

Queen Charlotte Islands.

194. Gairdner's Woodpecker.

  _Dryobates pubescens gairdneri_ (Aud.).

A very common resident on Vancouver Island, Coast of Mainland and
Lower Fraser Valley.

195. Batchelder's Woodpecker.

  _Dryobates pubescens homorus_ (Cab.).

Common throughout the interior of the Province, along the C. P. R., at
Ducks, and at Vernon. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and
Okanagan.

XENOPICUS Baird.

196. White-headed Woodpecker.

  _Xenopicus albolarvatus_ (Cass.).

A rare bird in this Province, found east of the Coast Range. Museum
specimen from Similkameen Valley, collected by R. V. Griffin.

PICOIDES Lacépède.

197. Black-backed Three-toed Woodpecker.

  _Picoides arcticus_ (Swains.).

Found only east of Coast Range, where in some localities it is quite
common. Mr. Brooks reports it from Okanagan.

198. Alaskan Three-toed Woodpecker.

  _Picoides americanus fasciatus_ (Bird).

West of Cascade Mountains common. Rare on Vancouver Island. Brooks
says common resident in the spruce zone on the Coast Range.

199. Alpine Three-toed Woodpecker.

  _Picoides americanus dorsalis_ (Baird).

Mountains east of Cascade Mountains, north to Cassiar.
(_Fannin_.)

SPHYRAPICUS Baird.

200. Red-naped Sapsucker.

  _Sphyrapicus varius nuchalis_ (Baird).

Generally distributed east of Cascade Mountains throughout the
Province. It was quite common at Duck's, May, 1895.

201. Red-breasted Sapsucker.

  _Sphyrapicus ruber notkensis_ (Suckow.).

Generally distributed along the Coast. Not uncommon on Vancouver
Island. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack.

202. Williamson's Sapsucker.

  _Sphyrapicus thyroideus_ (Cass.).

Taken at Similkameen, B. C., by R. V. Griffin, June, 1882, (Check List
of B. C. Birds, 1891--_Fannin_.)

CEOPHLOEUS Cabanis.

203. Northern Pileated Woodpecker.

  _Ceophloeus pileatus abieticola_ (Bangs.).

Common resident throughout the Province, on Vancouver Island and
Mainland through the interior to Okanagan. Mr. Brooks found it scarce
in the Cariboo District.

ASYNDESMUS (Wils.) Coues.

204. Lewis's Woodpecker.

  _Asyndesmus torquatus_ (Wils.).

Abundant through the interior of the Province, at Vernon and Grand
Prairie. I found it quite common at Chilliwhack this year. A summer
resident on Vancouver Island.

COLAPTES Swainson.

205. Northern Flicker.

  _Colaptes auratus luteus_ (Bangs.).

A rare bird of this Province, but is found on Vancouver Island and
east to the Rocky Mountains.

206. Red-shafted Flicker.

  _Colaptes cafer collaris_ (Vigors).

Common east of Cascade Mountains through the interior, at Duck's,
Sicamous and Okanagan.

207. North-western Flicker.

  _Colaptes cafer saturatior_ (Ridgew.).

Abundant resident west of Cascade Mountains; very common on Vancouver
Island.




Order MACROCHIRES. Goatsuckers, Swifts, etc.

Family CAPRIMULGIDÆ. Goatsuckers.

PHALÆNOPTILUS Ridgway.

208. Poor-will.

  _Phalænoptilis nuttallii_ (Aud.).

Southern interior portions of Province from Kamloops through the
Okanagan. Summer resident.

CHORDEILES Swainson.

209. Nighthawk.

  _Chordeiles virginianus_ (Gmel.).

An abundant summer resident east of Cascade Mountains. Mr. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack.

210. Western Nighthawk.

  _Chordeiles virginianus henryi_ (Cass.).

A summer resident west of Cascade Mountains. Abundant on Vancouver
Island.


Family MICROPODIDÆ. Swifts.

CYPSELOIDES Streubel.

211. Black Swift.

  _Cypseloides niger borealis_ (Ridgw.).

Common near Victoria during migration. Rev. J. H. Keen says only pass
over at Metlakatla. Said to breed in mountains back of Chilliwhack and
in the neighbourhood of Comox. (_Fannin_.) Taken at Chilliwhack
and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)

CHÆTURA Stephens.

212. Vaux's Swift.

  _Chætura vauxii_ (Towns.).

A summer resident on Vancouver Island and Mainland. I found it very
common near Sicamous, May 28th, 1895.


Family TROCHILIDÆ. Hummingbirds.

TROCHILUS Linnæus.

213. Black-chinned Hummingbird.

  _Trochilus alexandri_ (Bourc. & Muls.).

Confined to the Mainland. I have never seen it on Vancouver Island.
Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

SELASPHORUS Swainson.

214. Red-backed Rufous Hummingbird.

  _Selasphorus rufus_ (Gmel.).

An abundant summer resident west of Cascade Mountains, including
Vancouver Island. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Okanagan. Common at
Metlakatla (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

215. Green-backed Rufous Hummingbird. Allen's Hummingbird.

  _Selasphorus alleni_ (Hensh.).

Eastern Cascade and Rocky Mountain districts. (_Fannin_.)

STELLULA Gould.

216. Calliope Hummingbird.

  _Stellula calliope_ (Gould).

East and west of Cascade Mountains. (_Fannin_.)




Order PASSERES. Perching Birds.

Family TYRANNIDÆ. Tyrant Flycatchers.

TYRANNUS Cuvier.

217. Kingbird.

  _Tyrannus tyrannus_ (Linn.).

A common summer resident on the Mainland at Chilliwhack, Sardis, Ducks
and Vernon, and has been taken as far north as Port Simpson. Rare on
Vancouver Island.

218. Gray Kingbird.

  _Tyrannus dominicensis_ (Gmel.).

Accidentally in B. C. One specimen taken at Cape Beale, October 9,
1889, by Miss Cox, and presented to the Museum.

219. Arkansas Kingbird.

  _Tyrannus verticalis_ (Say).

A common summer resident on the Mainland. I have found it quite common
at Chilliwhack, Ducks and Okanagan, rarely west to Vancouver Island.

SAYORNIS Bonaparte.

220. Say's Phoebe.

  _Sayornis saya_ (Bonap.).

A summer resident. Not common on Vancouver Island, chiefly on Mainland
in the interior. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

CONTOPUS Cabanis.

221. Olive-sided Flycatcher.

  _Contopus borealis_ (Swains.).

A summer resident on Vancouver Island and Mainland. Mr. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

222. Western Wood Pewee.

  _Contopus richardsonii_ (Swains.).

A common summer resident on Vancouver Island and Mainland. Very common
at Sicamous, May, 1895.

EMPIDONAX Cabanis.

223. Western Flycatcher.

  _Empidonax difficilis_ (Baird).

A common summer resident west of Cascade Mountains on Mainland and
Vancouver Island. I also found it quite common at Skidegate, Queen
Charlotte Islands, July, 1895.

224. Traill's Flycatcher.

  _Empidonax trailli_ (Aud.).

A summer resident. I have found it quite common on Vancouver Island
and the Mainland at Sicamous and Vernon. Mr. Brooks has taken it at
Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

225. Hammond's Flycatcher.

  _Empidonax hammondi_ (Xantus.).

Summer resident. Chiefly on the Mainland, east and west of Cascade
Mountains. A few have been taken on Vancouver Island.

226. Wright's Flycatcher.

  _Empidonax wrightii_ (Baird).

Summer resident. Taken at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)


Family ALAUDIDÆ. Larks.

OTOCORIS Bonaparte.

227. Pallid Horned Lark.

  _Otocoris alpestris leucoloema_ (Coues.).

Common in spring and autumn on Vancouver Island. Have taken it at
Clover Point near Victoria. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and
Okanagan.

228. Streaked Horned Lark.

  _Otocoris alpestris strigata_ (Hensh.).

Spring and autumn migrant on Vancouver Island. Have taken it near
Victoria in September. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack. West of
Cascades; taken at Burrard Inlet and Vancouver Island (_Fannin_).
Fort Simpson by W. B. Anderson.

229. Dusky Horned Lark.

  _Otocoris alpestris merrilli_ (Dwight).

Chiefly east of Cascades. I have never known it to be taken on
Vancouver Island. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack and
Okanagan. Chas. de B. Green has taken it at Osoyoos.


Family CORVIDÆ. Crows, Jays, Magpies.

PICA Brisson.

230. American Magpie.

  _Pica pica hudsonica_ (Sab.).

A common resident on the Mainland, rarely west to Vancouver Island.
Breeds in the interior of the Mainland, east of Cascade Mountains.

CYANOCITTA Strickland.

231. Steller's Jay.

  _Cyanocitta stelleri_ (Gmel.).

An abundant resident west of Coast Range on Mainland and Vancouver
Island throughout the year.

232. Black-headed Jay.

  _Cyanocitta stelleri annectens_ (Baird).

This form is quite common in the interior from the Cascades east down
through the Okanagan. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Chilliwhack.

233. Queen Charlotte Jay.

  _Cyanocitta stelleri carlottæ_ (Osgood).

Queen Charlotte Islands; not uncommon at Skidegate, August, 1895.

PERISOREUS Bonaparte.

234. Rocky Mountain Jay.

  _Perisoreus canadensis capitalis_ (Ridgw.).

East of Cascade Mountains. Taken at Okanagan and in the Caribou
District by A. C. Brooks.

235. Oregon Jay.

  _Perisoreus obscurus_ (Ridgw.).

An abundant resident west of Cascades, on the Mainland, but not so
numerous on Vancouver Island.

236. Gray Jay.

  _Perisoreus obscurus griseus_ (Ridgw.).

California to British Columbia, east of the Coast and Cascade Ranges.
(_Ridgway_.)

CORVUS Linnæus.

237. Northern Raven.

  _Corvus corax principalis_ (Ridgw.).

A resident throughout the Province; more common on the Coast. I have
seen it quite common at Clayoquot, V. I., and in August, 1895, it was
very common at Skidegate, Queen Charlotte Islands. Mr. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan. Common at Metlakatla.
(_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

238. American Crow.

  _Corvus brachyrhynchos_ (Brehm.)

Common east of Coast Range; common at Sicamous, May, 1895. Mr. Brooks
has taken it at Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

239. Northwest Crow.

  _Corvus caurinus_ (Baird).

An abundant resident west of Cascade Mountains, on Mainland and
Vancouver Island, and fairly common at Skidegate, Queen Charlotte
Islands, July, 1895.

NUCIFRAGA Brisson.

240. Clarke's Nutcracker.

  _Nucifraga columbiana_ (Wils.).

A common resident on the Mainland, chiefly east of the Coast Range.
Rare on Vancouver Island.

CYANOCEPHALUS Bonaparte.

241. Blue Crow. Piñon Jay.

  _Cyanocephalus cyanocephalus_ (Wied.).

Rocky Mountain region to the Pacific Coast Ranges, but rather more
southerly; north to British Columbia; south to Lower California.--"Key
to N. A. Birds (Coues), Fifth Edition."


Family ICTERIDÆ. Blackbirds, Orioles, Etc.

DOLICHONYX Swainson.

242. Bobolink.

  _Dolichonyx oryzivorus_ (Linn.)

East and west of Cascade Mountains. Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C.
Brooks.

MOLOTHRUS Swainson.

243. Cowbird.

  _Molothrus ater_ (Bodd.).

A summer resident. I have found it fairly common in the neighbourhood
of Ducks, on C. P. R., and Okanagan. It is a rare straggler on
Vancouver Island; it has been taken near Victoria. Mr. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack. Rev. J. H. Keen reports it rare at
Metlakatla.

XANTHOCEPHALUS Bonaparte.

244. Yellow-headed Blackbird.

  _Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus_ (Bonap.).

A rare summer resident on the Mainland. I have heard of it at Vernon.
Fannin has found it above Clinton, on the Cariboo Road. Brooks has
taken it at Chilliwhack.

AGELAIUS Vieillot.

245. San Diego Redwing.

  _Agelaius phoeniceus neutralis_ (Ridgw.).

Breeding range north, to eastern British Columbia. (_Ridgway_.)
East of Cascades I found this form quite common near Vernon, June,
1895.

246. Northwestern Red-wing.

  _Agelaius phoeniceus caurinus_ (Ridgw.).

Common west of Cascades, on Mainland and Vancouver Island; it is found
throughout the year near Victoria.

STURNELLA Vieillot.

247. Western Meadowlark.

  _Sturnella magna neglecta_ (Aud.).

Abundant resident on Mainland and Vancouver Island, east and west of
Cascades.

ICTERUS Brisson.

248. Bullock's Oriole.

  _Icterus bullocki_ (Swains.).

A fairly common summer resident, chiefly east of Cascades. I found it
breeding along the valley of the Thompson and in the Okanagan, near
Vernon, May and June, 1895. Mr. Brooks has found it breeding at
Chilliwhack.

EUPHAGUS Cassin.

249. Rusty Blackbird.

  _Euphagus carolinus_ (Muller).

Rare. One specimen shot at Metlakatla by Rev. J. H. Keen, November,
26th, 1901, and presented by him to the Museum.

250. Brewer's Blackbird.

  _Euphagus cyanocephalus_ (Wagler.).

Common, and generally distributed on the Mainland; quite common in the
Lower Fraser Valley, Grand Prairie, south side of Thompson River, down
into the Okanagan country. Breeding in suitable localities. Not common
on Vancouver Island; a few have been taken near Victoria.


Family FRINGILLIDÆ. Finches, Sparrows, Etc.

HESPERIPHONA Bonaparte.

251. Western Evening Grosbeak.

  _Hesperiphona vespertina montana_ (Ridgw.).

Chiefly on the Mainland. West in winter to Vancouver Island and Lower
Fraser Valley. Taken at Chilliwhack and Okaiiagan by A. C. B.

PINICOLA Vieillot.

252. Alaskan Pine Grosbeak.

  _Pinicola enucleator alascensis_ (Ridgw.).

Mainland east and west of Cascade Mountains. Common in winter in the
neighbourhood of Clinton. Mr. Brooks reports it from Chilliwhack and
Okanagan. Rare at Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)

CARPODACUS Kaup.

253. California Purple Finch.

  _Carpodacus purpureus californicus_ (Baird).

An abundant summer resident west of Cascades. Quite a number winter on
Vancouver Island.

254. Cassin's Purple Finch.

  _Carpodacus cassini_ (Baird).

East of Cascades to Rocky Mountains. Tolerably common.

LOXIA Linnæus.

255. American Crossbill.

  _Loxia curvirostra minor_ (Brehm.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province, Island and Mainland.

256. White-winged Crossbill.

  _Loxia leucoptera_ (Gmel.).

An abundant resident chiefly on the Mainland, occasionally west to
Vancouver Island.

LEUCOSTICTE Swainson.

257. Gray-crowned Leucosticte.

  _Leucosticte tephrocotis_ (Swains.).

Rocky Mountain district. In winter, occasionally west to Cascades.
Mr. Brooks has taken it as far west as Chilliwhack.

258. Hepburn's Leucosticte.

  _Leucosticte tephrocotis littoralis_ (Baird).

Common on the Mainland from the Coast to Rocky Mountains. Breeds above
timber line in the interior.

ACANTHIS Bechstein.

259. Hoary Redpoll.

  _Acanthis hornemannii exilipes_ (Coues.).

Mouth of Quesnelle, S. Williams. Chilliwhack, A. C. Brooks.

260. Redpoll.

  _Acanthis linaria_ (Linn.).

The Province at large, but more abundant in the Rocky Mountain
district. West in winter to Vancouver Island.

ASTRAGALINUS Cabanis.

261. American Goldfinch.

  _Astragalinus tristis_ (Linn.).

Both slopes of Cascades to Rocky Mountains on the Mainland. Taken at
Okanagan by A. C. Brooks.

262. Willow Goldfinch.

  _Astragalinus tristis salicamans_ (Grinnell).

Taken at Okanagan by A. C. Brooks.

SPINUS Koch.

263. Pine Siskin.

  _Spinus pinus_ (Wils.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province. Breeds throughout its
range.

PASSER Brisson.

264. House Sparrow.

  _Passer domesticus_ (Linn.).

This bird has now become quite common in the cities along the Coast.

PASSERINA (Vieill).

265. Snowflake.

  _Passerina nivalis_ (Linn.).

Not common on Vancouver Island. More abundant east of Cascades on the
Mainland.

CALCARIUS Bechstein.

266. Lapland Longspur.

  _Calcarius lapponicus_ (Linn.).

The Province at large, but nowhere common. It has been taken a
Victoria, Chilliwhack, Burrard Inlet, Okanagan, Fort Simpson and
Metlakatla.

RHYNCHOPHANES Baird.

267. McCown's Longspur.

  _Rhynchophanes mccownii_ (Lawr.).

Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

POOECETES Baird.

268. Western Vesper Sparrow.

  _Pooecetes gramineus confinis_ (Baird).

Interior portions of the Mainland east of Cascades, and in the
Okanagan.

269. Oregon Vesper Sparrow.

  _Pooecetes gramineus affinis_ (Miller).

West of Cascades, including Vancouver Island.

PASSERCULUS Bonaparte.

270. Sandwich Sparrow.

  _Passerculus sandwichensis_ (Gmel.).

An abundant summer resident west of Cascades on the Mainland,
including Vancouver Island. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Okanagan.

271. Western Savanna Sparrow.

  _Passerculus sandwichensis alaudinus_ (Bonaparte).

A common summer resident on the Coast, including Vancouver Island.

COTURNICULUS Bonaparte.

272. Western Grasshopper Sparrow.

  _Coturniculus savannarum bimaculatus_ (Swainson).

A summer resident in the Okanagan, near Vernon. (_Brooks_.)

CHONDESTES Swainson.

273. Western Lark Sparrow.

  _Chondestes grammacus strigatus_ (Swains.).

Interior southern portions of the Mainland, from Chilliwhack east
through the Okanagan.

ZONOTRICHIA Swainson.

274. Harris's Sparrow.

  _Zonotrichia querula_ (Nutt.).

Cadbora Bay, near Victoria, October, 1894, A. H. Maynard; Comox,
November, 1894, W. B. Anderson; Sumas (Lower Fraser), 10th January,
1895, A. C. Brooks.

275. Gambel's Sparrow.

  _Zonotrichia leucophrys gambelii_ (Nutt.).

Mainland, east of Coast Range, east to Okanagan. Common.

276. Nuttall's Sparrow.

  _Zonotrichia leucophrys nuttalli_ (Ridgw.).

An abundant summer resident on Vancouver Island and Mainland, west
of Cascades.

277. Golden-crowned Sparrow.

  _Zonotrichia coronata_ (Pallas.).

Abundant during migrations on the Coast; have also taken it at
Chilliwhack and Okanagan.

SPIZELLA Bonaparte.

278. Western Tree Sparrow.

  _Spizella monticola ochracea_ (Brewst.).

Chilliwhack and Okanagan, A. C. Brooks; Victoria, A. H. Maynard.

279. Western Chipping Sparrow.

  _Spizella socialis arizonæ_ (Coues.).

An abundant summer resident east and west of Cascades. Breeds in the
neighbourhood of this City. Also a number remain throughout the
winter.

280. Clay-coloured Sparrow.

  _Spizella pallida_ (Swains.).

Carpenter's Mountain, 150-Mile House, Cariboo, July 3rd,
1901. (_Brooks_.)

281. Brewer's Sparrow.

  _Spizella breweri_ (Cass.).

Eastern Cascades and Rocky Mountains districts. Similkameen, R. V.
Griffin; Okanagan, A. C. Brooks.

JUNCO Wagler.

282. Slate-coloured Junco.

  _Junco hyemalis_ (Linn.).

Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

283. Oregon Junco.

  _Junco hyemalis oreganus_ (Townsend).

Abundant resident west of Cascades, including Vancouver Island.

284. Shufeldt's Junco.

  _Junco hyemalis shufeldti_ (Coale).

Breeding from interior British Columbia (Stuarts Lake) east to Rocky
Mountains, south to Vancouver Island.

MELOSIPZA Baird.

285. Rusty Song Sparrow.

  _Melosipza cinerea morphna_ (Oberh.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province. Breeds on Vancouver
Island and Mainland.

286. Sooty Song Sparrow.

  _Melosipza cinerea rufina_ (Bonap.).

An abundant resident, chiefly along the coast of Mainland and
Vancouver Island. I found it quite common at Skidegate, Queen
Charlotte Islands, August, 1895.

287. Lincoln's Sparrow.

  _Melosipza lincolnii_ (Aud.).

Not common. East and west of Cascades; a few have been taken near
Victoria. Mr. Brooks has taken it at Okanagan.

288. Forbush's Sparrow.

  _Melosipza lincolnii striata_ (Brewst.).

Collected at Comox, September, 1888, by E. H. Forbush. Taken at
Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

PASSERELLA Swainson.

289. Townsend's Sparrow.

  _Passerella iliaca unalaschcensis_ (Gmel.).

A common summer resident west of Cascades. A few remain throughout the
winter on Vancouver Island; I have taken it in November and January.

290. Slate-coloured Sparrow.

  _Passerella iliaca schistacea_ (Baird).

Southern portions of Mainland, east of Cascades. Sicamous, J. Fannin,
Okanagan, A. C. Brooks.

PIPILO Vieillot.

291. Spurred Towhee.

  _Pipilo maculatus megalonyx_ (Baird).

East of Cascades, south through the Okanagan.

292. Oregon Towhee.

  _Pipilo maculatus oregonus_ (Bell.).

An abundant resident west of Cascades. Breeds on Vancouver Island and
Mainland.

ZAMELODIA Coues.

293. Black-headed Grosbeak.

  _Zamelodia melanocephala_ (Swains).

A summer resident on Vancouver Island. Taken at Chilliwhack.
(_Brooks_.) A summer resident east and west of Cascades.
(_Fannin_.)

CYANOSPIZA Baird.

294. Lazuli Bunting.

  _Cyanospiza amoena_ (Say.).

A summer resident chiefly east of Cascades. I have seen it at
Chilliwhack and near Vernon. Rare on Vancouver Island.


Family TANAGRIDÆ. Tanagers.

PIRANGA Vieillot.

295. Louisiana Tanager.

  _Piranga ludoviciana_ (Wils.).

An abundant summer resident throughout the Province. Vancouver Island
and Mainland.


Family HIRUNDINIDÆ. Swallows.

PROGNE Boie.

296. Purple Martin.

  _Progne subis_ (Linn.).

A common summer resident chiefly in the cities along the Coast. West
of Cascades.

PETROCHELIDON Cabanis.

297. Cliff Swallow.

  _Petrochelidon lunifrons_ (Say.).

Common summer resident on the Mainland east and west of Cascades,
Chilliwhack, Okanagan and Cariboo Road.

HIRUNDO Linn.

298. Barn Swallow.

  _Hirundo erythrogastra_ (Bodd).

An abundant summer resident throughout the Province, including
Vancouver Island and Queen Charlotte Islands.

TACHYCINETA Cabanis.

299. White-bellied Swallow.

  _Tachycineta bicolor_ (Vieill.).

An abundant summer resident east and west of Cascades.

300. Northern Violet-green Swallow.

  _Tachycineta thalassina lepida_ (Mearns).

An abundant summer resident throughout the Province, east and west of
Cascades.

RIPARIA Forester.

301. Bank Swallow.

  _Riparia riparia_ (Linn.).

An abundant summer resident, chiefly east of Cascades, north to
Cariboo District. Very common from Sicamous down through the Okanagan.
Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.

STELGIDOPTERYX Baird.

302. Rough-winged Swallow.

  _Stelgidopteryx serripennis_ (Aud.).

A common summer resident throughout the Province. Vancouver Island and
Mainland.


Family AMPELIDÆ. Waxwings.

AMPELIS Linnæus.

303. Bohemian Waxwing.

  _Ampelis garrulus_ (Linn.).

An abundant resident chiefly east of Cascades. A winter visitant to
the Coast and Vancouver Island.

304. Cedar Bird.

  _Ampelis cedrorum_ (Vieill.).

A common summer resident throughout the Province. Vancouver Island and
Mainland.


Family LANIIDÆ. Shrikes.

LANIUS Linnæus.

305. Northern Shrike. Butcher-bird.

  _Lanius borealis_ (Vieill.).

Not common, but found distributed throughout the Province. Found
throughout the winter on the Coast.

306. White-rumped Shrike.

  _Lanis ludovicianus excubitorides_ (Swains.).

Chilliwhack, A. C. Brooks. Victoria, A. H. Maynard.


Family VIREONIDÆ. Vireos.

VIREO Vieillot.

307. Red-eyed Vireo.

  _Vireo olivaceus_ (Linn.).

Distributed over the southern portions of the Province, including
Vancouver Island. A summer resident. Chilliwhack and Okanagan, A. C.
Brooks.

308. Western Warbling Vireo.

  _Vireo gilvus swainsonii_ (Baird).

Common summer resident, west of Rocky Mountains to Pacific. Mainland
and Vancouver Island.

309. Cassin's Vireo.

  _Vireo solitarius cassinii_ (Xantus.).

A summer resident east and west of Cascades, including Vancouver
Island.

310. Anthony's Vireo.

  _Vireo huttoni obscurus_ (Anthony).

A summer resident on Vancouver Island.


Family MNIOTILTIDÆ. Wood Warblers.

HELMINTHOPHILA Ridgway.

311. Calaveras Warbler.

  _Helminthophila ruficapilla gutturalis_ (Ridgw.).

Rocky Mountains to Pacific. A summer resident. Common in the
Okanagan. (_Brooks_.)

312. Orange-crowned Warbler.

  _Helminthophila celata_ (Say.).

A common summer resident east and west of Cascades.

313. Lutescent Warbler.

  _Helminthophila celata lutescens_ (Ridgw.).

An abundant summer resident, chiefly west of Cascades, along the coast
of Mainland and Vancouver Island.

314. Tennessee Warbler.

  _Helminthophila peregrina_ (Wils.).

Taken at 150-Mile House, Cariboo, by A. C. Brooks.

DENDROICA Gray.

315. Alaskan Yellow Warbler.

  _Dendroica æstiva rubiginosa_ (Pallas).

An abundant summer resident throughout the Province, from Rocky
Mountains to the Pacific.

316. Myrtle Warbler.

  _Dendroica coronata_ (Linn.).

An abundant summer resident on Vancouver Island and Mainland, chiefly
west of Cascades. Rare at Metlakatla. (_Rev. J. H. Keen_.)
Okanagan. (_Brooks_).

317. Audubon's Warbler.

  _Dendroica auduboni_ (Towns.).

An abundant summer resident throughout the Province, Vancouver Island
and Mainland east to Rocky Mountains.

318. Magnolia Warbler.

  _Dendroica maculosa_ (Gmel.).

Okanagan, 1898 (_Rhoads_).

319. Black-throated Gray Warbler.

  _Dendroica nigrescens_ (Towns.).

Not common. A summer resident west of Cascades, but chiefly along the
Coast. Taken at Chilliwhack (_Brooks_).

320. Townsend's Warbler.

  _Dendroica townsendi_ (Townsend.).

Not common, but found distributed throughout the Province, chiefly
west of Cascades, including Vancouver Island and Queen Charlotte
Islands.

321. Hermit Warbler. Western Warbler.

  _Dendroica occidentalis_ (Townsend).

A summer resident, chiefly west of Cascade Range.

SEIURUS Swainson.

322. Grinnell's Water-thrush.

  _Seiurus noveboracensis notabilis_ (Ridgw.).

Taken at Ducks, C. P. R., by Clark P. Streator, August 7th, 1889.
Taken at Quesnel, August 30th, 1900, by A. C. Brooks.

GEOTHLYPIS Cabanis.

323. Macgillivray's Warbler.

  _Geothlypis tolmiei_ (Towns.).

A common summer resident throughout the Province, Vancouver Island and
Mainland.

324. Western Yellow-throat.

  _Geothlypis trichas occidentalis_ (Brewst.).

A common summer resident throughout the Province.

325. Pacific Yellow-throat.

  _Geothlypis trichas arizela_ (Oberh.)

Summer resident in the southern portion of Mainland and Vancouver
Island.

ICTERIA Vieillot.

326. Long-tailed Chat.

  _Icteria virens longicauda_ (Lawr.).

Summer resident in the southern portions of the Province, from Sumas
east to Okanagan, south of Ashcroft.

WILSONIA Bonaparte.

327. Wilson's Warbler.

  _Wilsonia pusilla_ (Wils.).

Vancouver Island and Mainland, east and west of Cascades. S. N.
Rhoads, 1892 (_Fannin_.)

328. Pileolated Warbler.

  _Wilsonia pusilla pileolata_ (Pall.).

A common summer resident on Vancouver Island and Mainland.

329. Golden Pileolated Warbler.

  _Wilsonia pusilla chryseola_ (Ridgw.).

A summer resident, New Westminster and Mount Lehman.

SETOPHAGA Swainson.

330. American Redstart.

  _Setophaga ruticilla_ (Linn.).

Found through the interior of the Province, from Barkerville south to
Okanagan, chiefly east of, and accidentally west of, Cascades. Taken
at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.


Family MOTACILLIDÆ. Wagtails and Pipits.

ANTHUS Bechstein.

331. American Pipit.

  _Anthus pensilvanicus_ (Lath.).

Very abundant during migration, east and west of Cascades. Found
throughout some winters on Vancouver Island.


Family CINCLIDÆ. Dippers.

CINCLUS Bechstein.

332. American Dipper.

  _Cinclus mexicanus_ (Swains.).

Common throughout the Province in suitable localities.


Family TROGLODYTIDÆ. Wrens.

GALEOSCOPTES Cabanis.

333. Catbird.

  _Galeoscoptes carolinensis_ (Linn.).

A common summer resident east and west of Cascades. Rare on Vancouver
Island.

SALPINCTES Cabanis.

334. Rock Wren.

  _Salpinctes obsoletus_ (Say.).

Common east of Cascades, rarely west to the Coast.
Chilliwhack. (_Brooks_.) Burrard Inlet. (_Fannin_.)

THRYOMANES Sclater.

335. Vigor's Wren.

  _Thryomanes bewickii spilurus_ (Vig.).

A common summer resident west of Cascades. Found throughout the winter
on Vancouver Island.

TROGLODYTES Vieillot.

336. Parkman's Wren.

  _Troglodytes aëdon parkmanii_ (Aud.).

A common summer resident east and west of Cascades, including
Vancouver Island.

OLBIORCHILUS Oberholser.

337. Western Winter Wren.

  _Olbiorchilus hiemalis pacificus_ (Baird).

An abundant resident east and west of Cascades, including Vancouver
Island.

TELMATODYTES Cabanis.

338. Tule Wren.

  _Telmatodytes palustris paludicola_ (Baird).

Abundant east of Cascades, from the lakes along the Cariboo Road,
south through the Okanagan. Taken at Chilliwhack by A. C. Brooks.


Family CERTHIIDÆ. Creepers.

CERTHIA Linnæus.

339. Rocky Mountain Creeper.

  _Certhia familiaris montana_ (Ridgw.).

Southern portion of east of Cascades. Okanagan.

340. California Creeper.

  _Certhia familiaris occidentalis_ (Ridgw.).

Common on Vancouver Island. East and west of Cascades on the Mainland.


Family SITTIDÆ. Nuthatches.

SITTA Linnæus.

341. Slender-billed Nuthatch.

  _Sitta carolinensis aculeata_ (Cass.).

Common east of Cascades, from Ashcroft south through the Okanagan. I
found it quite common near Shuswap, May, 1895.

342. Red-breasted Nuthatch.

  _Sitta canadensis_ (Linn.).

Common east and west of Cascades. Found throughout the winter on
Vancouver Island.

343. Pygmy Nuthatch.

  _Sitta pygmæa_ (Vig.).

East of Cascades, in the south-eastern portions of the Province. I
found it fairly common at Grand Prairie, May, 1895.


Family PARIDÆ. Titmice or Chickadees.

PARUS Linnæus.

344. Long-tailed Chickadee.

  _Parus atricapillus septentrionalis_ (Harris.).

Common east of Cascades, from Cornwall's south to Okanagan.

345. Oregon Chickadee.

  _Parus atricapillus occidentalis_ (Baird.).

A common resident west of Cascades.

346. Mountain Chickadee.

  _Parus gambeli_ (Ridgw.).

East of Cascades to Rocky Mountains, and south through Okanagan.

347. Columbia Chickadee.

  _Parus hudsonicus columbianus_ (Rhoads).

East of Cascades to Rocky Mountains, from Cassiar District south to
Okanagan.

348. Chestnut-backed Chickadee.

  _Parus rufescens_ (Towns.).

An abundant resident chiefly west of Cascades. Vancouver Island and
Queen Charlotte Islands. Taken at Arrow Lake by A. C. Brooks.


Family CHAMÆIDÆ. Wren, Tits and Bush-Tits.

PSALTRIPARUS Bonaparte.

349. Least Bush-tit.

  _Psaltriparus minimus_ (Towns.).

Rare. Taken at Sumas, November 25, 1899, by A. C. Brooks.


Family SYLVIIDÆ. Warblers. Kinglets.

REGULUS Cuvier.

350. Western Golden-crowned Kinglet.

  _Regulus satrapa olivaceus_ (Baird).

Abundant throughout the Province.

351. Ruby-crowned Kinglet.

  _Regulus calendula_ (Linn.).

Abundant throughout the Province.


Family TURDIDÆ. Thrushes, Solitaires and Bluebirds.

MYADESTES Swainson.

352. Townsend's Solitaire.

  _Myadestes townsendii_ (Aud.).

Not common. Found east and west of Cascades, including Vancouver
Island.

HYLOCICHLA Baird.

353. Willow Thrush.

  _Hylocichla fuscescens salicicola_ (Ridgw.).

A common summer resident east of Cascades.

354. Russet-backed Thrush.

  _Hylocichla ustulata_ (Nutt.).

A common summer resident west of Cascades. Very common on Queen
Charlotte Islands, July, 1895.

355. Olive-backed Thrush.
  _Hylocichla ustulata swainsoni_ (Cab.).

Southern portion of Mainland east of Cascades.

356. Alaska Hermit Thrush.

  _Hylocichla guttata_ (Pallas).

West of Cascades, chiefly coastwise. Common at Skidegate, Queen
Charlotte Islands, August, 1895.

357. Audubon's Hermit Thrush.

  _Hylocichla guttata auduboni_ (Baird).

Southern portions of the Province, east of Cascades to Rocky
Mountains.

MERULA Leach.

358. American Robin.

  _Merula migratoria_ (Linn.).

Both forms are to be found on Vancouver Island. Taken at Chilliwhack
by A. C. Brooks.

359. Western Robin.

  _Merula migratoria propinqua_ (Ridgw.).

An abundant resident throughout the Province.

IXOREUS Bonaparte.

360. Varied Thrush.

  _Ixoreus nævius_ (Gmel.).

Common throughout the Province, east and west of Cascades.

SIALIA Swainson.

361. Western Bluebird.

  _Sialia mexicana occidentalis_ (Towns.).

A common summer resident east and west of Cascades. A few winter on
Vancouver Island.

362. Mountain Bluebird.

  _Sialia arctica_ (Swains.).

A summer resident east and west of Cascades, including Vancouver
Island.




INDEX.


A.
                                        No.
Albatross, Black-footed                  35
Albatross, Short-tailed                  36
Auklet, Rhinoceros                       12
Auklet, Cassin's                         13

B.

Bittern, American                        88
Blackbird, Yellow-headed                244
Blackbird, San Diego Redwing            245
Blackbird, North-western                246
Blackbird, Rusty                        249
Blackbird, Brewer's                     250
Bluebird, Western                       361
Bluebird, Mountain                      362
Bobolink                                242
Brant                                    82
Brant, Black                             83
Bunting, Lazuli                         294
Bush-tit, Least                         349

C.

Catbird                                 333
Chat, Long-tailed                       326
Chickadee, Long-tailed                  344
Chickadee, Oregon                       345
Chickadee, Mountain                     346
Chickadee, Columbia                     347
Chickadee, Chestnut-backed              348
Cormorant, White-crested                 43
Cormorant, Brandt's                      44
Cormorant, Violet-green                  45
Cowbird                                 243
Coot, American                           96
Crane, Little Brown                      92
Crane, Sandhill                          93
Creeper, Rocky Mountain                 339
Creeper, California                     340
Crow, American                          238
Crow, Northwest                         239
Crossbill, American                     255
Crossbill, White-winged                 256
Cuckoo, Western Yellow-billed           188
Curlew, Long-billed                     122
Curlew, Hudsonian                       123

D.

Dipper, American                        332
Dove, Mourning                          148
Dowitcher, Long-billed                  101
Duck, Mallard                            51
Duck, Gadwall                            52
Duck, European Widgeon                   53
Duck, American Widgeon                   54
Duck, Green-winged Teal                  55
Duck, Blue-winged Teal                   56
Duck, Cinnamon Teal                      57
Duck, Shoveller                          58
Duck, Pintail                            59
Duck, Wood                               60
Duck, Red-head                           61
Duck, Canvas-back                        62
Duck, American Scaup                     63
Duck, Lesser Scaup                       64
Duck, Ring-necked                        65
Duck, American Golden-eye                66
Duck, Barrow's Golden-rye                67
Duck, Buffle-head                        68
Duck, Long-tailed                        69
Duck, Harlequin                          70
Duck, American Black Scoter              71
Duck, White-winged Scoter                72
Duck, Surf Scoter                        73
Duck, Ruddy                              74

E.

Eagle, Golden                           160
Eagle, Bald                             161

F.

Falcon, Prairie                         163
Falcon, Peale's                         165
Finch, California Purple                253
Finch, Cassin's Purple                  254
Flycatcher, Olive-sided                 221
Flycatcher, Western                     223
Flycatcher, Traill's                    224
Flycatcher, Hammond's                   225
Flycatcher, Wright's                    226
Flicker, Northern                       205
Flicker, Red-shafted                    206
Flicker, North-western                  207
Fulmar, Pacific                          37

G.

Godwit, Marbled                         112
Goose, Lesser Snow                       75
Goose, Ross's Snow                       76
Goose, American White-fronted            77
Goose, Canada                            78
Goose, Hutchin's                         79
Goose, White-cheeked                     80
Goose, Cackling                          81
Goose, Emperor                           84
Goldfinch, American                     261
Goldfinch, Willow                       262
Grebe, Western                            1
Grebe, American Red-necked                2
Grebe, Horned                             3
Grebe, American Eared                     4
Grebe, Pied-billed                        5
Grouse, Sooty                           134
Grouse, Richardson's                    135
Grouse, Franklin's                      136
Grouse, Canadian Ruffed                 137
Grouse, Gray Ruffed                     138
Grouse, Oregon Ruffed                   139
Grouse, Columbian Sharp-tailed          143
Grouse, Sage                            144
Grosbeak, Western Evening               251
Grosbeak, Alaskan Pine                  252
Grosbeak, Black-headed                  293
Guillemot, Pigeon                        16
Gull, Ivory                              21
Gull, Glaucous-winged                    23
Gull, Western                            24
Gull, American                           25
Gull, California                         26
Gull, Ring-billed                        27
Gull, Short-billed                       28
Gull, Heermann's                         29
Gull, Bonaparte's                        30
Gull, Sabine's                           31
Gyrfalcon                               162

H.

Hawk, Marsh                             151
Hawk, Sharp-shinned                     152
Hawk, Cooper's                          153
Hawk, American Goshawk                  154
Hawk, Western Goshawk                   155
Hawk, Western Red-tailed                156
Hawk, Red-bellied                       157
Hawk, Swainson's                        158
Hawk, American Rough-legged             159
Hawk, Duck                              164
Hawk, Pigeon                            166
Hawk, Desert Sparrow                    169
Heron, Great Blue                        89
Heron, North-west Coast                  90
Heron, Snowy                             91
Hummingbird, Black-chinned              213
Hummingbird, Red-backed Rufous          214
Hummingbird, Green-backed Rufous        215
Hummingbird, Calliope                   216

I.

Ibis, White-faced Glossy                 87

J.

Jaeger, Parasitic                        19
Jaeger, Pomarine                         18
Jaeger, Long-tailed                      20
Jay, Steller's                          231
Jay, Black-headed                       232
Jay, Queen Charlotte                    233
Jay, Rocky Mountain                     234
Jay, Oregon                             235
Jay, Gray                               236
Jay, Piñon                              241
Junco, Slate-colored                    282
Junco, Oregon                           283
Junco, Shufeldt's                       284

K.

Kittiwake, Pacific                       22
Kingfisher, Belted                      189
Kingbird                                217
Kingbird, Gray                          218
Kingbird, Arkansas                      219
Kinglet, Western Golden-crowned         350
Kinglet, Ruby-crowned                   351
Knot                                    103

L.

Lark, Pallid Horned                     227
Lark, Streaked Horned                   228
Lark, Dusky Horned                      229
Lencosticte, Gray-crowned               257
Lencosticte, Hepburn's                  258
Longspur, Lapland                       266
Longspur, McCown's                      267
Loon, Great Northern Diver                6
Loon, Black-throated                      7
Loon, Pacific                             8
Loon, Red-throated                        9

M.

Martin, Purple                          296
Magpie, American                        230
Meadowlark, Western                     247
Merlin, Black                           167
Merlin, Richardson's                    168
Merganser, American                      48
Merganser, Red-breasted                  49
Merganser, Hooded                        50
Murrelet, Ancient                        14
Murrelet, Marbled                        15
Murre, California                        17

N.

Nighthawk                               207
Nighthawk, Western                      208
Nutcracker, Clarke's                    240
Nuthatch, Slender-billed                341
Nuthatch, Red-breasted                  342
Nuthatch, Pygmy                         343

O.

Oriele, Bullock's                       248
Osprey, American                        170
Owl, American Long-eared                171
Owl, Short-eared                        172
Owl, Northern Spotted                   173
Owl, Great Gray                         174
Owl, Richardson's                       175
Owl, Saw-whet                           176
Owl, North-West Saw-whet                176A
Owl, Kennicott's Screech                177
Owl, Macfarlane's Screech               178
Owl, Great Horned                       179
Owl, Western Horned                     180
Owl, Arctic Horned                      181
Owl, Dusky Horned                       182
Owl, Snowy                              183
Owl, American Hawk                      184
Owl, Burrowing                          185
Owl, Pygmy                              186
Owl, California Pygmy                   187
Oyster-catcher, Black                   131

P.

Partridge, Mountain                     132
Partridge, California                   133
Pelican, American White                  46
Pelican, California Brown                47
Petrel, Gray Fork-tailed                 41
Petrel, Leach's                          42
Pewee, Western Wood                     222
Phalarope, Red                           97
Phalarope, Northern                      98
Phalarope, Wilson's                      99
Pheasant, Ring-necked                   145
Phoebe, Say's                           220
Pigeon, Band-tailed                     146
Pigeon, Passenger                       147
Pipit, American                         331
Plover, American Golden                 125
Plover, Black-bellied                   124
Plover, Killdeer                        126
Plover, Semipalmated                    127
Poor-Will                               208
Ptarmigan, Willow                       140
Ptarmigan, Rock                         141
Ptarmigan, White-tailed                 142
Puffin, Tufted                           10
Puffin, Horned                           11

R.

Rail, Virginia                           94
Rail, Carolina                           95
Raven, Northern                         237
Redpoll, Hoary                          259
Redpoll                                 260
Redstart, American                      330
Robin, American                         358
Robin, Western                          359

S.

Sanderling                              111
Sandpiper, Stilt                        102
Sandpiper, Sharp-tailed                 104
Sandpiper, Pectoral                     105
Sandpiper, Baird's                      106
Sandpiper, Least                        107
Sandpiper, Red-backed                   108
Sandpiper, Semipal mated                109
Sandpiper, Western Semipalmated         110
Sandpiper, Solitary                     115
Sandpiper, Western Solitary             116
Sandpiper, Bartramian                   119
Sandpiper, Buff-breasted                120
Sandpiper, Spotted                      121
Sapsucker, Red-naped                    200
Sapsucker, Red-breasted                 201
Sapsucker, Williamson's                 202
Shrike, Northern                        305
Shrike, White-rumped                    306
Shearwater, Black-vented                 38
Shearwater, Dark-bodied                  39
Shearwater, Slender-billed               40
Siskin, Pine                            263
Snipe, Wilson's                         100
Snowflake                               265
Solitaire, Townsend's                   352
Sparrow, House                          264
Sparrow, Western Vesper                 268
Sparrow, Oregon Vesper                  269
Sparrow, Sandwick                       270
Sparrow, Western Savanna                271
Sparrow, Western Grasshopper            272
Sparrow, Western Lark                   273
Sparrow, Harris's                       274
Sparrow, Gambel's                       275
Sparrow, Nuttall's                      276
Sparrow, Golden-crowned                 277
Sparrow, Western Tree                   278
Sparrow, Western Chipping               279
Sparrow, Clay-colored                   280
Sparrow, Brewer's                       281
Sparrow, Rusty Song                     285
Sparrow, Sooty Song                     286
Sparrow, Lincoln's                      287
Sparrow, Forbush's                      288
Sparrow, Townsend's                     289
Sparrow, Slate-coloured                 290
Surf-bird                               128
Swan, Whistling                          85
Swan, Trumpeter                          86
Swallow, Cliff                          297
Swallow, Barn                           298
Swallow, White-bellied                  299
Swallow, Northern violet-green          300
Swallow, Bank                           301
Swallow, Rough-winged                   302
Swift, Black                            211
Swift, Vaux                             212

T.

Tanager, Louisaria                      295
Tatler, Wandering                       118
Tern, Common                             32
Tern, Arctic                             33
Tern, Black                              34
Thrush, Willow                          353
Thrush, Russet-backed                   354
Thrush, Olive-backed                    355
Thrush, Alaska Hermit                   356
Thrush, Audubon's                       357
Thrush, Varied                          360
Towhee, Spurred                         291
Towhee, Oregon                          292
Turnstone                               129
Turnstone, Black                        130

V.

Vireo, Red-eyed                         307
Vireo, Western Warbling                 308
Vireo, Cassin's                         309
Vireo, Anthony's                        310
Vulture, California                     149
Vulture, Turkey                         150

W.

Warbler, Calaver's                      311
Warbler, Orange-crowned                 312
Warbler, Lutescent                      313
Warbler, Tennessee                      314
Warbler, Alaskan Yellow                 315
Warbler, Myrtle                         316
Warbler, Audubon's                      317
Warbler, Magnolia                       318
Warbler, Black-throated Gray            319
Warbler, Townsend's                     320
Warbler, Macgillivray's                 323
Warbler, Hermit                         321
Warbler, Western Yellow-throat          324
Warbler, Pacific Yellow-throat          325
Warbler, Wilson's                       327
Warbler, Pileolated                     328
Warbler, Golden Pileolated              329
Water-thrush, Grinnell's                322
Waxwing, Bohemian                       303
Waxwing, Cedar                          304
Willett, Western                        117
Woodpecker, Northern Hairy              190
Woodpecker, Harris's                    191
Woodpecker, Cabanis's                   192
Woodpecker, Queen Charlotte             193
Woodpecker, Gairdner's                  194
Woodpecker, Batchelder's                195
Woodpecker, White-headed                196
Woodpecker, Black-backed Three-toed     197
Woodpecker, Alaskan Three-toed          198
Woodpecker, Alpine Three-toed           199
Woodpecker, Northern Pileated           203
Woodpecker, Lewis's                     204
Wren, Rock                              334
Wren, Vigor's                           335
Wren, Parkman's                         336
Wren, Western Winter                    337
Wren, Tule                              338

Y.

Yellow-legs, Greater                    113
Yellow-legs, Lesser                     114








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Catalogue of British Columbia Birds
by Francis Kermode

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRITISH COLUMBIA BIRDS ***

This file should be named 6329-8.txt or 6329-8.zip

Produced by Karen Fabrizius, David Starner
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
https://gutenberg.org or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

https://www.gutenberg.org/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

