The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Huge Hunter, by Edward S. Ellis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Huge Hunter
       Or, the Steam Man of the Prairies

Author: Edward S. Ellis

Posting Date: March 21, 2009 [EBook #7506]
Release Date: February, 2005
First Posted: May 12, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUGE HUNTER ***




Produced by Blackmask Online.  HTML version by Al Haines.







The Huge Hunter;

OR, The Steam Man of the Prairies.


by

EDWARD S. ELLIS




CHAPTER I. THE TERROR OF THE PRAIRIES.

CHAPTER II. 'HANDLE ME GENTLY.'

CHAPTER III. A GENIUS.

CHAPTER IV. THE TRAPPER AND THE ARTISAN.

CHAPTER V. ON THE YELLOWSTONE.

CHAPTER VI. THE MINERS.

CHAPTER VII. THE STEAM MAN ON HIS TRAVELS.

CHAPTER VIII. INDIANS.

CHAPTER IX. THE STEAM MAN AS A HUNTER.

CHAPTER X. WOLF RAVINE.

CHAPTER XI. THE STEAM MAN ON A BUFFALO HUNT.

CHAPTER XII. THE GRIZZLY BEAR.

CHAPTER XIII. AN APPALLING DANGER.

CHAPTER XIV. THE HUGE HUNTER.

CHAPTER XV. THE ATTACK IN THE RAVINE.

CHAPTER XVI. THE REPULSE.

CHAPTER XVII. HOMEWARD BOUND.

CHAPTER XVIII. THE ENCAMPMENT.

CHAPTER XIX. THE DOINGS OF A NIGHT.

CHAPTER XX. THE CONCLUDING CATASTROPHE.



                CHAPTER I. THE TERROR OF THE PRAIRIES.

'HOWLY vargin! what is that?' exclaimed Mickey McSquizzle, with
something like horrified amazement.

'By the Jumping Jehosiphat, naow if that don't, beat all natur'!'

'It's the divil, broke loose, wid full steam on!'

There was good cause for these exclamations upon the part of the
Yankee and Irishman, as they stood on the margin of Wolf Ravine, and
gazed off over the prairie. Several miles to the north, something like
a gigantic man could be seen approaching, apparently at a rapid gait
for a few seconds, when it slackened its speed, until it scarcely
moved.

Occasionally it changed its course, so that it went nearly at right
angles. At such times, its colossal proportions were brought out in
full relief, looking like some Titan as it took its giant strides over
the prairie.

The distance was too great to scrutinize the phenomenon closely; but
they could see that a black volume of smoke issued either from its
mouth or the top of its head, while it was drawing behind it a sort of
carriage, in which a single man was seated, who appeared to control
the movements of the extraordinary being in front of him.

No wonder that something like superstitious have filled the breasts of
the two men who had ceased hunting for gold, for a few minutes, to
view the singular apparition; for such a thing had scarcely been
dreamed of at that day, by the most imaginative philosophers; much
less had it ever entered the head of these two men on the western
prairies.

'Begorrah, but it's the ould divil, hitched to his throttin 'waging,
wid his ould wife howlding the reins!' exclaimed Mickey, who had
scarcely removed his eyes from the singular object.

'That there critter in the wagon is a man,' said Hopkins, looking as
intently in the same direction. 'It seems to me,' he added, a moment
later, 'that there's somebody else a-sit-ting alongside of him, either
a dog or a boy. Wal, naow, ain't that queer?'

'Begorrah! begorrah! do ye hear that? What shall we do?'

At that instant, a shriek like that of some agonized giant came home
to them across the plains, and both looked around, as if about to flee
in terror; but the curiosity of the Yankee restrained him. His
practical eye saw that whatever it might be, it was a human
contrivance, and there could be nothing supernatural about it.

'Look!'

Just after giving its ear-splitting screech, it turned straight toward
the two men, and with the black smoke rapidly puffing from the top of
its head, came tearing along at a tremendous rate.

Mickey manifested some nervousness, but he was restrained by the
coolness of Ethan, who kept his position with his eye fixed keenly
upon it.

Coming at such a railroad speed, it was not long in passing the
intervening space. It was yet several hundred yards distant, when
Ethan Hopkins gave Mickey a ringing slap upon the shoulder.

'Jerusalem! who do ye s'pose naow, that man is sitting in the carriage
and holding the reins?'

'Worrah, worrah! why do you ax me, whin I'm so frightened entirely
that I don't know who I am myself?'

'Its Baldy.'

'Git out!' replied the Irishman, but added the next moment, 'am I
shlaping or dhraming? It's Baldy or his ghost.'

It certainly was no ghost, judging from the manner in which it acted;
for he sat with his hat cocked on one side, a pipe in his mouth, and
the two reins in his hands, just as the skillful driver controls the
mettlesome horses and keeps them well in hand.

He was seated upon a large pile of wood, while near nestled a little
hump-backed, bright-eyed boy, whose eyes sparkled with delight at the
performance of the strange machine.

The speed of the steam man gradually slackened, until it came opposite
the men, when it came to a dead halt, and the grinning 'Baldy,' as he
was called, (from his having lost his scalp several years before, by
the Indians), tipped his hat and said:

'Glad to see you hain't gone under yit. How'd you git along while I
was gone?'

But the men were hardly able to answer any questions yet, until they
had learned something more about the strange creation before them.
Mickey shied away, as the timid steed does at first sight of the
locomotive, observing which, the boy (at a suggestion from Baldy),
gave a string in his hand a twitch, whereupon the nose of the
wonderful thing threw out a jet of steam with the sharp screech of the
locomotive whistle. Mickey sprung a half dozen feet backward, and
would have run off at full speed down the ravine, had not Ethan
Hopkins caught his arm.

'What's the matter, Mickey, naow! Hain't you ever heard anything like
a locomotive whistle?'

'Worrah, worrah, now, but is that the way the crather blows its nose?
It must have a beautiful voice when it shnores at night.'

Perhaps at this point a description of the singular mechanism should
be given. It was about ten feet in hight, measuring to the top of the
'stove-pipe hat,' which was fashioned after the common order of felt
coverings, with a broad brim, all painted a shiny black. The face was
made of iron, painted a black color, with a pair of fearful eves, and
a tremendous grinning mouth. A whistle-like contrivance was trade to
answer for the nose. The steam chest proper and boiler, were where the
chest in a human being is generally supposed to be, extending also
into a large knapsack arrangement over the shoulders and back. A pair
of arms, like projections, held the shafts, and the broad flat feet
were covered with sharp spikes, as though he were the monarch of
base-ball players. The legs were quite long, and the step was natural,
except when running, at which time, the bolt uprightness in the figure
showed different from a human being.

In the knapsack were the valves, by which the steam or water was
examined. In front was a painted imitation of a vest, in which a door
opened to receive the fuel, which, together with the water, was
carried in the wagon, a pipe running along the shaft and connecting
with the boiler.

The lines which the driver held controlled the course of the steam
man; thus, by pulling the strap on the right, a deflection was caused
which turned it in that direction, and the same acted on the other
side. A small rod, which ran along the right shaft, let out or shut
off the steam, as was desired, while a cord, running along the left,
controlled the whistle at the nose.

The legs of this extraordinary mechanism were fully a yard apart, so
as to avoid the danger of its upsetting, and at the same time, there
was given more room for the play of the delicate machinery within.
Long, sharp, spike-like projections adorned those toes of the immense
feet, so that there was little danger of its slipping, while the
length of the legs showed that, under favorable circumstances, the
steam man must be capable of very great speed.

After Ethan Hopkins had some what familiarized himself with the
external appearance of this piece of mechanism, he ventured upon a
more critical examination.

The door being opened in front, showed a mass of glowing coals lying
in the capacious abdomen of the giant; the hissing valves in the
knapsack made themselves apparent, and the top of the hat or
smoke-stack had a sieve-like arrangement, such as is frequently seen
on the locomotive.

There were other little conveniences in the way of creating a draft,
and of shutting it off when too great, which could scarcely be
understood without a scrutiny of the figure itself.

The steam man was a frightful looking object, being painted of a
glossy black, with a pair of white stripes down its legs, and with a
face which was intended to be of a flesh color, but, which was really
a fearful red.

To give the machinery an abundance of room, the steam man was
exceedingly corpulent, swelling out to aldermanic proportions, which,
after all, was little out of harmony with its immense hight.

The wagon dragged behind was an ordinary four-wheeled vehicle, with
springs, and very strong wheels, a framework being arranged, so that
when necessary it could be securely covered. To guard against the
danger of upsetting it was very broad, with low wheels, which it may
be safely said were made to 'hum' when the gentleman got fairly under
way.

Such is a brief and Imperfect description of this wonderful steam man,
as it appeared on its first visit to the Western prairies.



                   CHAPTER II. 'HANDLE ME GENTLY.'

WHEN Ethan Hopkins had surveyed the steam man fully, he drew a long
sigh and exclaimed:

'Wal, naow, that's too had!'

'What's that?' inquired Bicknell, who had been not a little amused at
his open-mouthed amazement.

'Do you know I've been thinking of that thing for ten years, ever
since I went through Colt's pistol factory in Hartford, when I was a
youngster?'

'Did you ever think of any plan!'

'I never got it quite right, but I intended to do it after we got
through digging for gold. The thing was just taking shape in my head.
See here, naow, ain't you going to give a fellow a ride?'

'Jis' what I wanted; shall I run it for you?'

'No, I see how it works; them 'ere thingumbobs and gimcracks do it
all.'

'Johnny, hyar, will tell yer 'bout it.'

The little humpback sprung nimbly down, and ran around the man,
explaining as well as he could in a few moments the manner of
controlling its movements. The Yankee felt some sensitiveness in being
instructed by such a tiny specimen, and springing into the wagon,
exclaimed:

'Git eout! tryin' to teach yer uncle! I knowed how the thing would
work before you were born!'

Perching himself on the top of the wood which was heaped up in the
wagon, the enthusiastic New Englander carefully looked over the
prairie to see that the way was clear, and was about to 'let on
steam,' when he turned toward the Irishman.

'Come, Mickey, git up here.'

'Arrah now, but I never learnt to ride the divil when I was home in
the ould country,' replied the Irishman, backing away.

But both Ethan and Baldy united in their persuasions, and finally
Mickey consented, although with great trepidation. He timidly climbed
upon the wagon and took his seat beside the Yankee, looking very much
as a man may be supposed to look who mounts the hearse to attend his
own funeral.

'When yer wants to start, jist pull that 'ere gimcrack!' said Baldy,
pointing to the crook in the rod upon which his hand rested.

'Git eout, naow! do you think you're goin' to teach me that has
teached school fur five year in Connecticut?'

There were some peculiarities about the steam man which made him a
rather unwieldy contrivance. He had a way of starting with a jerk,
unless great skill was used in letting on steam; and his stoppage was
equally sudden, from the same cause.

When the Irishman and Yankee had fairly ensconced themselves on their
perch, the latter looked carefully round to make sure that no one was
in the way, and then he tuned the valve, which let on a full head of
steam.

For a second the monster did not stir. The steam had not fairly taken
'hold' yet; then he raised one immense spiked foot and held it
suspended in air.

'That's a great contrivance, ain't it?' exclaimed Ethan,
contemptuously.

'Can't do nothin' more than lift his foot. Wait till you see more!
he's goin' to dance and skip like a lamb, or outrun any locomotive you
ever sot eyes on!'

'Bad luck to the loikes of yees, why d' yees go on?' exclaimed the
irate Irishman, as he leaned forward and addressed the obdurate
machine. 'Are yees tryin' to fool us, bad luck to yees?'

At this instant, the feet of the steam man began rising and falling
with lightning like rapidity, the wagon being jerked forward with such
sudden swiftness, that both Ethan and Mickey turned back summersets,
rolling heels over head off the vehicle to the ground, while the
monster went puffing over the prairie, and at a terrific rate. Baldy
was about to start in pursuit of it, when Johnny, the deformed boy,
restrained him.

'It won't run far; the steam is nearly out.'

'Be jibbers! but me head is caved in!' exclaimed the Irishman, rising
to his feet, rubbing his head, and looking at his hand to see whether
there was blood upon it.

'Jerusalem! I thought she had upset or busted her b'iler!' said the
Yankee, looking around him with a bewildered air.

The two spectators were laughing furiously, and they could scarcely
stand the trick which had been played upon them.

'Let your old machine go to blazes!' muttered Ethan. 'If it acts that
way, I don't want nothin' to do with it.'

In the mean time the steamer had gone rattling over the prairie, until
about a quarter of a mile distant, when it rapidly slackened, and as
quickly halted.

'What's the matter wid it now?' asked Mickey; 'has it got the cramps
and gi'n out?'

'The steam is used up!' replied the dwarf, as he hurried after it; 'we
can soon start it again!'

All four made all haste toward the stationary figure; but the light
frame and superior activity of little Johnny brought him to it
considerably in advance of the others. Emptying a lot of wood from the
wagon, he was busily engaged in throwing it into his stomach when the
other two came up. His eyes sparkled, as he said:

'Jump up there, and I'll give you all a ride!'

The three clambered up and took their seats with great care, Mickey
and Ethan especially clinging as if their life depended on it.

Johnny threw in the fuel until the black smoke poured in a stream from
the hat. Before leaving it, he opened two smaller doors, at the knees,
which allowed the superfluous cinders and ashes to fall out. The water
in the boiler was then examined, and found all right. Johnny mounted
in his place, and took charge.

'Now we are ready! hold fast!'

'Begorrah, if I goes I takes the wagon wid me,' replied Mickey, as he
closed his teeth and hung on like death.

The engineer managed the monster with rare skill, letting on a full
head of steam, and just as it made a move shutting it off, and letting
it on almost immediately, and then shutting off and admitting it
again, until it began moving at a moderate pace, which, however,
rapidly increased until it was going fully thirty miles an hour.

Nothing could be more pleasant than this ride of a mile over the
prairie. The plain was quite level, and despite the extraordinary
speed attained, the wagon glided almost as smoothly as if running upon
a railroad. Although the air was still, the velocity created a stiff
breeze about the ears of the four seated on the top of the wood.

The hight of the steam man's head carried the smoke and cinders clear
of those behind, while the wonderful machinery within, worked with a
marvelous exactness, such as was a source of continued amazement to
all except the little fellow who had himself constructed the
extraordinary mechanism. The click of the joints as they obeyed their
motive power was scarcely audible, and, when once started, there was
no unevenness at all in its progress.

When the party had ridden about a half-mile, Johnny described a large
circle, and finally came back to the starting, checking the progress
with the same skill that he had started it. He immediately sprung
down, examined the fire, and several points of the man, when finding
everything right, he opened his knee-caps and let cinders and ashes
drop out.

'How kin yeou dew that?' inquired Ethan Hopkins, peering over his
shoulder.

'What's to hinder?'

'How kin he work his legs, if they're holler that way and let the fire
down 'em?'

'They ain't hollow. Don't you see they are very large, and there is
plenty of room for the leg-rods, besides leaving a place for the draft
and ashes?'

'Wal, I swan, if that ain't rather queer. And you made it all out of
your head naow?' asked the Yankee, looking at the diminutive inventor
before him.

'No, I had to use a good deal of iron,' was the reply of the
youngster, with a quizzical smile.

'You mean you got up the thing yourself?' 'Yes, sir,' was the quiet
but proud reply of the boy.

'Jingo and Jerusalem! but your daddy must be fond of you!' exclaimed
the enthusiastic New Englander, scanning him admiringly from head to
foot.

'I haven't any father.'

'Your mother then.'

'I don't know about that.'

'Say, you, can't yer tell a feller 'bout it?'

'Not now; I haven't time.'

As the steam horse was to rest for the present, he was 'put up.' The
engineer opened several cavities in his legs and breast, and different
parts of his body, and examined the machinery, carefully oiling the
various portions, and when he had completed, he drew a large oil skin
from the wagon, which, being spread out, covered both it and the steam
man himself.



                        CHAPTER III. A GENIUS.

HAVING PROGRESSED thus far in our story, or properly having began in
the middle, it is now necessary that we should turn back to the proper
starting point.

Several years since a widow woman resided in the outskirts of St.
Louis, whose name was Brainerd. Her husband had been a mechanic, noted
for his ingenuity, but was killed some five years before by the
explosion of a steam boiler. He left behind him a son, hump-backed,
dwarfed, but with an amiable disposition that made him a favorite with
all with whom he came in contact.

If nature afflicts in one direction she frequently makes amends in
another direction, and this dwarf, small and misshapen as he was, was
gifted with a most wonderful mind. His mechanical ingenuity bordered
on the marvelous. When he went to school, he was a general favorite
with teachers and pupils. The former loved him for his sweetness of
disposition, and his remarkable proficiency in all studies, while the
latter based their affection chiefly upon the fact that he never
refused to assist any of them at their tasks, while with the
pocket-knife which he carried he constructed toys which were their
delight. Some of these were so curious and amusing that, had they
been securer by letters patent, they would have brought a competency
to him and his widowed mother.

But Johnny never thought of patenting them, although the principal
support of himself and mother came from one or two patents, which his
father had secured upon inventions, not near the equal of his.

There seemed no limit to his inventive powers. He made a locomotive
and then a steamboat, perfect in every part, even to the minutest,
using nothing but his knife, hammer, and a small chisel. He
constructed a clock with his jack-knife, which kept perfect time, and
the articles which he made were wonderfully stared at at fairs, and in
show windows, while Johnny modestly pegged away at some new idea. He
became a master of the art of telegraphy without assistance from any
one using merely a common school philosophy with which to acquire the
alphabet. He then made a couple of batteries, ran a line from his
window to a neighbor's, insulating it by means of the necks of some
bottles, taught the other boy the alphabet, and thus they amused
themselves sending messages back and forth.

Thus matters progressed until he was fifteen years of age, when he
came home one day, and lay down on the settee by his mother, and gave
a great sigh.

'What is the matter?' she inquired. 'I want to make something.'

'Why, then, don't you make it?'

'Because I don't know what it shall be; I've fixed up everything I can
think of.'

'And you are like Alexander, sighing for more worlds to conquer. Is
that it?'

'Not exactly, for there is plenty for one to do, if I could only find
out what it is.'

'Have you ever made a balloon?' The boy laughed.

'You were asking for the cat the other day, and wondering what had
become of her. I didn't tell you that the last I saw of her was
through the telescope, she being about two miles up in the clouds, and
going about fifty miles an hour.'

'I thought you looked as though you knew something about her,' replied
the mother, trying to speak reprovingly, and yet smiling in spite of
herself.

'Can't you tell me something to make?' finally asked the boy.

'Yes; there is something I have often thought of, and wonder why it
was not made long ago; but you are not smart enough to do it, Johnny.'

'Maybe not; but tell me what it is.'

'It is a man that shall go by steam!' The boy lay still several
minutes without speaking a word and then sprung up. 'By George! I'll
do it!' And he started out of the room, and was not seen again until
night. His mother felt no anxiety. She was pleased; for, when her boy
was at work, he was happy, and she knew that he had enough now, to
keep him engaged for months to come.

So it proved. He spent several weeks in thought, before he made the
first effort toward constructing his greatest success of all. He then
enlarged his workshop, and so arranged it, that he would not be in
danger of being seen by any curious eyes. He wanted no disturbance
while engaged upon this scheme.

From a neighboring foundry, whose proprietor took great interest in
the boy, he secured all that he needed. He was allowed full liberty to
make what castings he chose, and to construct whatever he wished. And
so he began his work.

The great point was to obtain the peculiar motion of a man walking.
This secured, the man himself could be easily made, and dressed up in
any style required. Finally the boy believed that he had hit upon the
true scheme.

So he plied harder than ever, scarcely pausing to take his meals.
Finally he got the machine together, fired up, and with feelings
somewhat akin to those, of Sir Isaac Newton, when demonstrating the
truth or falsity of some of his greatest discoveries, he watched the
result.

Soon the legs begin moving up and down, but never a step did they
advance! The power was there, sufficient to run a saw-mill, every
thing seemed to work, but the thing wouldn't go!

The boy was not ready to despair. He seated himself on the bench
beside the machine, and keeping up a moderate supply of steam,
throwing in bits of wood, and letting in water, when necessary, he
carefully watched the movement for several hours.

Occasionally, Johnny walked slowly back and forth, and with his eyes
upon the 'stately stepping,' endeavored to discover the precise nature
of that which was lacking in his machine.

At length it came to him. He saw from the first that it was not merely
required that the steam man should lift up its feet and put them down
again, but there must be a powerful forward impulse at the same
moment. This was the single remaining difficulty to be overcome. It
required two weeks before Johnny Brainerd succeeded. But it all came
clear and unmistakable at last, and in this simple manner:

(Ah! but we cannot be so unjust to the plodding genius as to divulge
his secret. Our readers must be content to await the time when the
young man sees fit to reveal it himself.)

When the rough figure was fairly in working order, the inventor
removed everything from around it, so that it stood alone in the
center of his shop. Then he carefully let on steam.

Before he could shut it off, the steam man walked clean through the
side of his shop, and fetched up against the corner of the house, with
a violence that shook it to its foundation. In considerable
trepidation, the youngster dashed forward, shut off steam, and turned
it round. As it was too cumbersome for him to manage in any other way,
he very cautiously let on steam again, and persuaded it to walk back
into the shop, passing through the same orifice through which it had
emerged, and came very nigh going out on the opposite side again.

The great thing was now accomplished, and the boy devoted himself to
bringing it as near perfection as possible. The principal thing to be
feared was its getting out of order, since the slightest
disarrangement would be sufficient to stop the progress of the man.

Johnny therefore made it of gigantic size, the body and limbs being no
more than 'Shells,' used as a sort of screen to conceal the working of
the engine. This was carefully painted in the manner mentioned in
another place, and the machinery was made as strong and durable as it
was possible for it to be. It was so constructed as to withstand the
severe jolting to which it necessarily would be subjected, and finally
was brought as nearly perfect as it was possible to bring a thing not
possessing human intelligence.

By suspending the machine so that Its feet were clear of the floor,
Johnny Brainerd ascertained that under favorable circumstances It
could run very nearly sixty miles an hour. It could easily do that,
and draw a car connected to it on the railroad, while on a common road
it could make thirty miles, the highest rate at which he believed it
possible for a wagon to be drawn upon land with any degree of safety.

It was the boy's intention to run at twenty miles an hour, while where
everything was safe, he would demonstrate the power of the invention
by occasionally making nearly double that.

As it was, he rightly calculated that when it came forth, it would
make a great sensation throughout the entire United States.



               CHAPTER IV. THE TRAPPER AND THE ARTISAN.

'HELLO, YOUNKER! what in thunder yer tryin' to make?'

Johnny Brainerd paused and looked up, not a little startled by the
strange voice and the rather singular figure which stood before him.
It was a hunter in half civilized costume, his pants tucked into his
immense boot tops, with revolvers and rifles at his waist, and a
general negligent air, which showed that he was at home in whatever
part of the world he chose to wander.

He stood with his hand in his pocket, chewing his quid, and
complacently viewing the operations of the boy, who was not a little
surprised to understand how he obtained entrance into his shop.

'Stopped at the house to ax whar old Washoe Pete keeps his hotel,'
replied the stranger, rightly surmising the query which was agitating
him, 'and I cotched a glimpse of yer old machine. Thought I'd come in
and see what in blazes it war. Looks to me like a man that's gwine to
run by steam.'

'That's just what it is,' replied the boy, seeing there was no use in
attempting to conceal the truth from the man.

'Will it do it?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Don't think you mean to lie, younker, but I don't believe any such
stuff as that.'

'It don't make any difference to me whether you believe me or not,'
was the quiet reply of the boy; 'but if you will come inside and shut
the door, and let me fasten it, so that there will be no danger of our
being disturbed, I will soon show you.'

These two personages, so unlike in almost every respect, had taken
quite a fancy to each other. The strong, hardy, bronzed trapper,
powerful in all that goes to make up the physical man, looked upon the
pale, sweet-faced boy, with his misshapen body, as an affectionate
father would look upon an afflicted child.

On the other hand, the brusque, outspoken manner of the hunter pleased
the appreciative mind of the boy, who saw much to admire, both in his
appearance and manner.

'I don't s'pose yer know me,' said the stranger, as he stepped inside
and allowed the boy to secure the door behind him.

'I never saw you before.'

'I am Baldy Bicknell, though I ginerally go by the name of 'Baldy.''

'That's rather an odd name.'

'Yas; that's the reason.'

As he spoke, the stranger removed his hat and displayed his
clean-shaven pate.

'Yer don't understand that, eh? That 'ere means I had my ha'r lifted
ten years ago. The Sioux war the skunks that done it. After they took
my top-knot off.  It had grow'd on ag'in and that's why they call me
Baldy.'

In the mean time the door had been closed, and all secured. The hat of
the steam man emptied its smoke and steam into a section of
stove-pipe, which led into the chimney, so that no suspicion of
anything unusual could disturb the passers-by in the street.

'You see it won't do to let him walk here, for when I tried it first,
he went straight through the side of the house; but you can tell by
the way in which he moves his legs, whether he is able to walk or
not.'

'That's the way we ginerally gits the p'ints of an animal,' returned
Baldy, with great complaisance, as he seated himself upon a bench to
watch the performance.

It required the boy but a short time to generate a sufficient quantity
of steam to set the legs going at a terrific rate, varying the
proceedings by letting some of the vapor through the whistle which
composed the steam man's nose.

Baldy Bicknell stood for some minutes with a surprise too great to
allow him to speak. Wonderful as was the mechanism, yet the boy who
had constructed it was still more worthy of wonder. When the steam had
given out, the hunter placed his big hand upon the head of the little
fellow, and said:

'You'se a mighty smart chap, that be you. Did anybody help you make
that?'

'No; I believe not.'

'What'll you take for it?'

'I never thought of selling it.'

'Wal, think of it now.'

'What do you want to do with it?

'Thar's three of us goin' out to hunt fur gold, and that's jist the
thing to keep the Injins back an' scart. I've been out thar afore, and
know what's the matter with the darned skunks. So, tell me how much
money will buy it.'

'I would rather not sell it, said Johnny, after a few minutes' further
thought.' It has taken me a great while to finish it, and I would
rather not part with it, for the present, at least.'

'But, skin me, younker, I want to buy it! I'll give you a thousand
dollars fur it, slap down.'

Although much less than the machine was really worth, yet it was a
large offer, and the boy hesitated for a moment. But it was only for a
moment, when he decidedly shook his head.

'I wish you wouldn't ask me, for I don't want to sell it, until I have
had it some time. Besides, it isn't finished yet.'

'It ain't,' exclaimed Baldy, in surprise. 'Why, it works, what more do
you want?'

'I've got to make a wagon to run behind it.'

'That's it, eh? I thought you war goin' to ride on its back. How much
will it draw?'

'As much as four horses, and as fast as they can run.'

The hunter was half wild with excitement. The boy's delight was never
equal to one-half of his.

'Skulp me ag'in, ef that don't beat all! It's jest the thing for the
West; we'll walk through the Injins in the tallest kind of style, and
skear 'em beautiful. How long afore you'll have it done?'

'It will take a month longer, at least.'

Baldy stood a few minutes in thought.

'See here, younker, we're on our way to the 'diggin's,' and spect to be
thar all summer. Ef the red-skins git any ways troublesome, I'm comin'
back arter this y'ar covey. Ef yer don't want to sell him, yer
needn't. Ef I bought him, it ain't likely I'd run him long afore I'd
bust his b'iler, or blow my own head off.'

'Just what I thought when you were trying to persuade me to sell it,'
interrupted the boy.

'Then, if he got the cramp in any of his legs, I wouldn't know how to
tie it up ag'in, and thar we'd be.'

'I am glad to see you take such a sensible view of it,' smiled Johnny.

'So, I'm goin' on West, as I said, with two fools besides myself, and
we're goin' to stay thar till yer get this old thing finished; and
then I'm comin' after you to take a ride out thar.'

'That would suit me very well,' replied the boy, his face lighting up
with more pleasure than he had shown. 'I would be very glad to make a
trip on the prairies.'

'Wal, look fur me in about six weeks.'

And with this parting, the hunter was let out the door, and
disappeared, while Johnny resumed his work.

That day saw the steam man completed, so far as it was possible. He
was painted up, and every improvement made that the extraordinarily
keen mind of the boy could suggest. When he stood one side, and
witnessed the noiseless but powerful workings of the enormous legs, he
could not see that anything more could be desired.

It now remained for him to complete the wagon, and he began at once.

It would have been a much easier matter for him to have secured an
ordinary carriage or wagon, and alter it to suit himself; but this was
not in accordance with the genius of the boy. No contrivance could
really suit him unless he made it himself. He had his own ideas, which
no one else could work out to his satisfaction.

It is unnecessary to say that the vehicle was made very strong and
durable.

This was the first great requisite. In some respects it resembled the
ordinary express wagons, except that it was considerably smaller.

It had heavy springs, and a canvas covering, with sufficient, as we
have shown in another place, to cover the man also, when necessary.

This was arranged to carry the wood, a reserve of water, and the
necessary tools to repair it, when any portion of the machinery should
become disarranged.

English coal could be carried to last for two days, and enough wood to
keep steam going for twenty-four hours. When the reserve tank in the
bottom of the wagon was also filled, the water would last nearly as
long.

When these contingencies were all provided against, the six weeks
mentioned by the hunter were gone, and Johnny Brainerd found himself
rather longing for his presence again.



                    CHAPTER V. ON THE YELLOWSTONE.

BALDY BICKNELL was a hunter and trapper who, at the time we bring him
to the notice of the reader, had spent something over ten years among
the mountains and prairies of the West.

He was a brave, skillful hunter, who had been engaged in many
desperate affrays with the red-skins, and who, in addition to the loss
of the hair upon the crown of his head, bore many other mementos on
his person of the wild and dangerous life that he had led.

Like most of his class, he was a restless being, constantly flitting
back and forth between the frontier towns and the western wilds. He
never went further east than St. Louis, while his wanderings, on more
than one occasion, had led him beyond the Rocky Mountains.

One autumn he reached the Yellowstone, near the head of navigation,
just as a small trading propeller was descending the stream. As much
from the novelty of the thing, as anything else, he rode on board,
with his horse, with the intention of completing his journey east by
water.

On board the steamer he first met Ethan Hopkins and Mickey McSquizzle,
who had spent ten years in California, in a vain hunt for gold, and
were now returning to their homes, thoroughly disgusted with the
country, its inhabitants and mineral resources.

Baldy was attracted to them by their peculiarities of manner; but it
is not probable that anything further would have resulted from this
accidental meeting, but for a most startling and unforeseen
occurrence.

While still in the upper waters of the Yellowstone, the steamer
exploded her boiler, making a complete wreck of the boat and its
contents. The hunter, with the others, was thrown into the water, but
was so bruised and injured that he found it impossible to swim, and he
would assuredly have been drowned but for the timely assistance of his
two acquaintances.

Neither the Yankee nor Irishman were hurt in the least, and both
falling near the trapper, they instantly perceived his helplessness
and came to his rescue. Both were excellent swimmers, and had no
difficulty in saving him.

'Do ye rist aisy!' said Mickey, as he saw the hunter's face contorted
with pain, as he vainly struggled in the water, 'and it's ourselves
that 'll take the good care of yees jist.'

'Stop yer confounded floundering,' admonished Hopkins; 'it won't do no
good, and there ain't no necessity for it.'

One of them took the arm upon one side, and the other the same upon
the opposite side, and struck out for the shore. The poor trapper
realized his dire extremity, and remained motionless while they towed
him along.

'Aisy jist-aiey now!' admonished Mickey: 'ye're in a bad fix; but by
the blessin' of Heaven we'll do the fair thing wid yees. We understand
the science of swimmin', and--'

At that moment some drowning wretch caught the foot of the Irishman,
and he was instantly drawn under water, out of sight.

Neither Hopkins nor Baldy lost presence of mind in this fearful
moment, but continued their progress toward shore, as though nothing
of the kind had happened.

As for the Irishman, his situation for the time was exceedingly
critical. The man who had clutched his foot did so with the grasp of a
drowning man; in their struggle both went to the bottom of the river
together. Here, by a furious effort, Mickey shook him free, and coming
to the surface, struck out again for the suffering hunter.

'It is sorry I am that I was compelled to leave yees behind,' he
muttered, glancing over his shoulder in search of the poor fellow from
whom he had just freed himself; 'but yees are past helpin', and so
it's maeself that must attend to the poor gentleman ahead.'

Striking powerfully out, he soon came beside his friends again and
took the drooping arm of Baldy Bicknell.

'Be yees sufferin' to a great extent?' inquired the kind-hearted
Irishman, looking at the white face of the silent hunter.

'Got a purty good whack over the back,' he replied, between his
compressed lips, as he forced back all expression of pain.

''Ye'll be aisier when we fotch ye to the land, as me uncle obsarved
whin he hauled the big fish ashore that was thrashing his line to
pieces jist.'

'Twon't take you long to git over it,' added Hopkins, anxious to give
his grain of consolation; 'you look, now, like quite a healthy young
man.'

The current was quite rapid, and it was no light labor to tow the
helpless hunter ashore; but the two friends succeeded, and at length
drew him out upon the land and stretched him upon the sward.

The exertion of keeping their charge afloat, and breasting the current
at the same time, carried them a considerable distance downstream, and
they landed perhaps an eighth of a mile below where the main body of
shivering wretches were congregated.

'Do yees feel aisy?' inquired Mickey, when the hunter had been laid
upon the grass, beneath some overhanging bushes.

'Yes, I'll soon git over it but woofh! that thar war a whack of the
biggest kind I got. It has made me powerful weak.'

'What might it have been naow!' inquired Hopkins.

'Can't say, fust thing I know'd, I didn't know nothin', remember suthin'
took me back the head, and the next thing I kerwholloped in the
water.'

The three men had lost everything except what was on their bodies when
the catastrophe occurred. Their horses were gone, and they hadn't a
gun between them; nothing but two revolvers, and about a half dozen
charges for each.

Of the twenty odd who were upon the steamer at the time of the
explosion, nearly one-half were killed; they sinking to the bottom
almost as suddenly as the wrecked steamer, of which not a single trace
now remained.

The survivors made their way to land, reaching it a short distance
below their starting-point, and here they assembled, to commiserate
with each other upon their hapless lot and determine how they were to
reach home.

Our three friends had remained upon shore about half an hour, the two
waiting for the third to recover, when the latter raised himself upon
his elbow in the attitude of listening. At the same time he waved his
hand for the others to hold their peace.

A moment later he said:

'I
hear Injins.''

'Begorrah! where bees the same?' demanded Mickey, starting to his
feet, while Ethan gazed alarmedly about.

'Jist take a squint up the river, and tell me ef they ain't pitchin'
into the poor critters thar.'

Through the sheltering trees and undergrowth, which partly protected
them, the two men gazed up-stream. To their horror, they saw fully
fifty Indians massacring the survivors of the wreck, whooping,
screeching and yelling like demons, while their poor victims were
vainly endeavoring to escape them.

'Begorrah, now, but that looks bad!' exclaimed the Irishman. 'Be the
same towken, what is it that we can do?'

'Jerusalem!  They'll be sure to pay us a visit.  I'll be gumtued if they
won't,' added the Yankee, in some trepidation, as he cowered down
again by the side of the hunter, and said to him in a lower Voice:

'The worst of it is, we haven't got a gun atwixt us. Of course we
shall stick by you if we have to lose our heads fur it. But don't you
think they'll pay us a visit?'

'Like 'noughtin',' was the indifferent reply of the hunter, as he laid
his head back again, as if tired of listening to the tumult.

'Can't we do anything to get you out of danger!'

'Can't see that you kin; you two fellers have done me a good turn in
gittin' me ashore, so jist leave me yere, and it don't make no
difference about me one way or t'other, Ef I hear 'em comin' I'll jist
roll into the water and go under in that style.'

'May the Howly Vargin niver smile upon us if we dissart you in this
extremity,' was the reply of the fervent-hearted Irishman.

'And by the jumpin' jingo! if we was consarnedly mean enough to do it,
there ain't no need of it.'

As the Yankee spoke, he ran down to the river, and walking out a short
distance, caught a log drifting by and drew it in.

'Naow, Mr. Baldy, or Mr. Bicknell, as you call yourself, we'll all
three git hold of that and float down the river till we git beyond
fear of the savages.'

The plan was a good one, and the hunter so expressed himself. With
some help he managed to crawl to the river bank, where one arm was
placed over the log, in such a manner that he could easily float,
without any danger of sinking.

'Keep as close to shore as you kin,' he said, as they were about
shoving off.

'We can go faster in the middle,' said Hopkins.

'But the reds'll see us, and it'll be all up then.'

This was the warning of prudence, and it was heeded.



                       CHAPTER VI. THE MINERS.

IT WAS late in the afternoon when the explosion occurred, and it was
just beginning to grow dark when the three friends began drifting down
the Yellowstone.

This fact was greatly in their favor, although there remained an hour
or two of great danger, in case the Indians made any search for them.
In case of discovery, there was hardly an earthly chance for escape.

The log or raft, as it might be termed, had floated very quietly
down-stream for about half an hour, when the wonderfully acute ears of
the trapper detected danger.

'Thar be some of the skunks that are creep-in 'long shore,' said he;
'you'd better run in under this yar tree and hold fast awhile.'

The warning was heeded. Just below them, the luxuriant branches of an
oak, dipped in the current, formed an impenetrable screen. As the log,
guided thither, floated beneath this, Mickey and Ethan both caught
hold of the branches and held themselves motionless.

'Now wait till it's dark, and then thar'll be no fear of the
varmints,' added the trapper.

''Sh! I haars sumfin'!' whispered the Irishman

'What is it?' asked Ethan.

'How does I know till yees kaaps still?'

'It's the reds goin' long the banks,' said the trapper.

The words were yet in his mouth, when the voice of one Indian was
heard calling to another. Neither Mickey nor Ethan had the remotest
idea of the meaning of the words uttered, but the trapper told them
that they were inquiring of each other whether anything had been
discovered of more fugitives. The answer being in the negative, our
friends considered their present position safe.

When it was fairly dark, and nothing more was seen or heard of the
Indians, the raft was permitted to float free, and they drifted with
the current. They kept the river until daylight, when, having been in
the water so long, they concluded it best to land and rest themselves.
By the aid of their revolvers they succeeded in' kindling a fire, the
warmth of which proved exceedingly grateful to all.

They would have had a very rough time had they not encountered a party
of hunters who accompanied them to St. Louis, where the trapper had
friends, and where, also, he had a good sum of money in the bank.

Here Baldy remained all winter, before he entirely recovered from the
hurt which he received during the explosion and sinking of the
steamer. When the Irishman and Yankee were about to depart, he asked
them where they were going.

'I'm goin' home in Connecticut and goin' to work on the farm, and
that's where I'm goin' to stay. I was a fool ever to leave it for this
confounded place. I could live decent put there, and that's more than
I can do in this blamed country.'

'And I shall go back to work on the Erie railroad, at thirty-siven
cents a day and boord myself,' replied the Irishman.

'If yer were sartin of findin' all the gold yor want, would yer go
back to Califony?''

'Arrah. Now, what are yees talkin' about?' asked McSquizzle, somewhat
impatiently. 'What is the good of talkin'?'

'I didn't ax yer to fool with yer,' replied the trapper, 'thar's a place
that I know away out West, that I call Wolf Ravine, whar thar's enough
gold to make both of yer richer than yer ever war afore, and then
leave some for yer children.'

'Jerusalem! but you're a lucky dog!' exclaimed Ethan Hopkins, not
daring to hope that he would reveal the place. 'Why don't you dig it
up naow, yourself?'

'I only found it a month ago, and I made a purty good haul of it, as
it was. When that old boss of mine went down with the steamer, he
carried a powerful heft of gold with him, and if anybody finds his
carcass, it'll be the most vallyable one they ever come across.'

'Jingo! if I'd know'd that, I'd taken a hunt for him myself.'

'Howsumever, that's neither yar nor thar. You both done me a good turn
when I got into trouble on the river, and I mud' up my mind to do what
I could toward payin' it back the first chance I got. I didn't say
nothin' of it when we was on our way, 'cause I was afeard it would
make you too crazy to go back ag'in: but if you'll come back this way
next spring I'll make the trip with you.'

'Why not go naow?' eagerly inquired Hopkins.

'It's too late in the season. I don't want to be thar when thar's too
much snow onto the ground, and then I must stay yar till I git well
over that whack I got on the boat.'

It is hardly necessary to say that the offer of the kind-hearted
trapper was accepted with the utmost enthusiasm. Mickey and Ethan were
more anxious to go out upon the prairies than they had been a year and
a half before, when they started so full of fife and hope for that
vast wilderness, and had come back with such discouragement and
disgust.

It was arranged that as soon as the succeeding spring had fairly set
in, they would set out on their return for St. Louis, where the
trapper would meet and accompany them to the wonderful gold region of
which he had spoken.

Before continuing their journey homeward, Baldy presented each with a
complete outfit, paid their passage to their homes, and gave them a
snug sum over. Like the Indian, he never could forget a kindness shown
him, nor do too great a favor to those who had so signally benefited
him.

So the separation took place again; and, on the following spring
Mickey and Ethan appeared in St. Louis, where they had no difficulty
in finding their old friend, the trapper.

He had recovered entirely from his prostrating blow, and was expecting
them, anxious and glad to join in the promised search for gold. As the
fair weather had really begun, there was no time lost in unnecessary
delay. The purse of Baldy Bicknell was deep, and he had not the common
habit of intoxication, which takes so much substance from a man. He
purchased a horse and accouterments for each of his friends; and,
before they started westward, saw that nothing at all was lacking in
their outfit.

Three weeks later the men drew rein in a tort of valley, very deep but
not very wide. It was on the edge of an immense prairie, while a river
of considerable size flowed by the rear, and by a curious circuit
found its way into the lower portion of the ravine, dashing and
roaring forward in a furious canyon.

The edge and interior of the ravine was lined with immense bowlders
and rocks, while large and stunted trees seemed to grow everywhere.

'Yar's what I call Wolf Ravine,' said Baldy when they had spent some
time in looking; about them.

'And be the same towken, where is the goold?' inquired Mickey.

'Yes, that there is what I call the important question,' added Ethan.

'That it is, of the greatest account, as me grandmither observed, whin
she fell off the staaple, and axed whether her pipe was broke.'

'It's in thar,' was the reply of the hunter, as he pointed to the
wildest-looking portion of the ravine.

'Let's geit it then.'

'Thar be some other things that have got to be looked after first,'
was the reply, 'and we've got to find a place to stow ourselves away.'

This was a matter of considerable difficulty: but they succeeded at
last in discovering a retreat in the rocks, where they were secure
from any attack, no matter by how formidable a number made.

After this, they hunted up a grazing place for their animals, which
were turned loose.

They soon found that the trapper had not deceived them. There was an
unusually rich deposit of gold in one portion of the ravine, and the
men fell to work with a will, conscious that they would reap a rich
reward for their labor.

The name, Wolf Ravine, had been given to it by the trapper, because on
his first discovery of it he had shot a large mountain wolf, that was
clambering up the side; but none others were seen afterward.

But there was one serious drawback to this brilliant prospect of
wealth. Indians of the most treacherous and implacable kind were all
around them, and were by no means disposed to-let them alone.

On the second day after their labor, a horde of them came screeching
down upon them; and had it not been for the safe retreat, which the
trapper's foresight had secured, all three would have been massacred.

As it was, they had a severe fight, and were penned up for the better
part of two days, by which time they had slain too many of their
enemies that the remaining ones were glad to withdraw.

But when the trapper stole out on a visit to his horses he found that
every one had been completely riddled by balls. The treacherous dogs
had taken every means of revenge at hand.

'Skin me fur a skunk, but we've stood this long as we ought to!'
exclaimed Baldy Bicknell, when he returned. 'You take care of
yourselves till I come back again!'

With which speech he slung his rifle over his shoulder and started for
St. Louis.



              CHAPTER VII. THE STEAM MAN ON HIS TRAVELS.

YOUNG BRAINERD had a mortal fear that the existence of the steam man
would be discovered by some outsider, when a large crowd would
probably collect around his house, and his friends would insist on a
display of the powers of the extraordinary mechanism.

But there was no one in the secret except his mother, and there was no
danger of her revealing it. So the boy experimented with his invention
until there was nothing more left for him to do, except to sit and
watch its workings.

Finally, when he began to wonder at the prolonged delay of the
trapper, who had visited him some weeks before, he made his appearance
as suddenly as if he had risen from the ground, with the inquiry:

'Have you got that thundering old thing ready?'

'Yes: he has been ready for a week, and waiting.'

'Wal, start her out then, fur I'm in a hurry.'

'You will have to wait awhile, for we can't get ready under half a
day.'

It was the hunter's supposition that the boy was going to start the
man right off up street, and then toward the West; but he speedily
revealed a far different plan.

It was to box up the man and take it to Independence by steamboat. At
that place they would take it out upon the prairie, set it up and
start it off, without any fear of disturbance from the crowds which
usually collect at such places, as they could speedily run away from
them.

When the plan was explained to Baldy, he fully indorsed it, and the
labor was begun at once. The legs of the steam man being doubled up,
they were able to get it in a box, which gave it the appearance of an
immense piano under transportation. This, with considerable
difficulty, was transported to the wharf, where, with much grumbling
upon the part of the men, it was placed on board the steamboat,
quickly followed by the wagon and the few necessary tools.

The boy then bade his mother good-by, and she, suspecting he would be
gone but a short time, said farewell to him, with little of the regret
she would otherwise have felt, and a few hours later the party were
steaming rapidly up the 'Mad Missouri.'

Nothing worthy of notice occurred on the passage, and they reached
Independence in safety. They secured a landing somewhat above the
town, on the western side, where they had little fear of disturbance.

Here the extraordinary foresight and skill of the boy was manifest,
for, despite the immense size of the steam man, it was so put together
that they were able to load it upon the wagon, and the two, without
any other assistance, were able to drag it out upon the prairie.

'You see, it may break down entirely,' remarked young Brainerd, 'and
then we can load it on the wagon and drag it along.'

'That must be a powerful strong wagon to carry such a big baby in if,
as that.'

'So it is; it will hold five times the weight without being hurt in
the least.'

It was early in the forenoon when they drew It out upon the prairie in
this manner, and began putting it together. It certainly had a
grotesque and fearful look when it was stripped of all its bandages,
and stood before them in all its naked majesty.

It had been so securely and carefully put away, that it was found
uninjured in the least. The trapper could not avoid laughing when the
boy clambered as nimbly up its shoulder as another Gulliver, and made
a minute examination of every portion of the machinery.

While thus employed, Baldy took the shafts of the wagon, and trotted
to a farm-house, which he descried in the distance, where he loaded it
down with wood and filled the tank with water. By the time he
returned, Johnny had everything in readiness, and they immediately
began 'firing up.'

In this they bore quite a resemblance to the modern steam fire
engines, acquiring a head of steam with remarkable quickness. As the
boy had never yet given the man such an opportunity to stretch his
legs as he was now about to do, he watched its motions with
considerable anxiety.

Everything was secured in the most careful manner, a goodly quantity
of fuel piled on, the boiler filled with water, and they patiently
waited the generation of a sufficient head of steam.

'Is it all good prairie land in that direction?' inquired the boy,
pointing to the West.

'Thar's all yer kin want.'

'Then we'll start. Look out!'

Despite the warning thus kindly given, the steam man started with a
sudden jerk, that both of them came near being thrown out of the
wagon.

The prairie was quite level and hard, so that everything was
favorable, and the wagon went bounding over the ground at a rate so
fast that both the occupants were considerably frightened, and the boy
quickly brought it down to a more moderate trot.

This speed soon became monotonous, and as it ran so evenly, Baldy
said:

'Let her go, younker, and show us what she can do.'

The rod controlling the valve was given a slight pull, and away they
went, coursing like a locomotive over the prairies, the wheels
spinning round at a tremendous rate, while the extraordinary speed
caused the wind thus created almost to lift the caps from their heads,
and a slight swell in the prairie sent the wagon up with a bound that
threatened to unseat them both.

It worked splendidly. The black smoke puffed rapidly from the top of
the hat, and the machinery worked so smoothly that there was scarcely
a click heard. The huge spiked feet came lightly to the ground, and
were lifted but a short distance from it, and their long sweep and
rapid movement showed unmistakably that the steam man was going at a
pace which might well defy anything that had yet swept the prairies.

As there was no little risk in running at this speed, and as young
Brainerd had not yet become accustomed to controlling it, he slackened
the rate again, so that it sank to an easy gliding motion, equal to
the rapid trot of an ordinary horse.

Fully ten minutes were passed in this manner, when steam was entirely
shut off, whereupon the giant came to such a sudden halt that both
were thrown violently forward and bruised somewhat.

'Skulp me! but don't stop quite so sudden like,' said the hunter.
'It's a little unhandy fur me to hold up so quick!'

'I'll soon learn to manage it,' replied Johnny. 'I see it won't do to
shut off all at once.'

Descending from his perch, he examined every portion of the engine.
Several parts were found heated, and the fuel was getting low. The
water in the boiler, however, was just right, the engineer having been
able to control that from his seat in the wagon.

Throwing in a lot of wood, they remounted to their perch and started
forward again. There was an abundance of steam, and the boy readily
acquired such a familiarity with the working of his man, that he
controlled it with all the skill of an experienced engineer.

The speed was slackened, then increased. It stopped and then started
forward again with all the ease and celerity that it could have done
if really human, while it showed a reserve of power and velocity
capable of performing wonders, if necessary.

As yet they had seen nothing of any travelers. They were quite anxious
to come across some, that they might show them what they were capable
of doing.

'There must be some passing over the plains,' remarked Johnny, when
they had passed some thirty or forty miles.

'Plenty of 'em; but we've got out of the track of 'em. If you'll turn
off summat to the left, we'll run foul of 'em afore dark.'

The boy did as directed, and the rattling pace was kept up for several
hours. When it was noon they helped themselves to a portion of the
food which they brought with them, without checking their progress in
the least. True, while the boy was eating, he kept one eye on the
giant who was going at such rapid strides; but that gentleman
continued his progress in an unexceptionable manner, and needed no
attention.

When the afternoon was mostly gone, Baldy declared that they had gone
the better part of a hundred miles.

The boy could hardly credit it at first; but, when he recalled that
they had scarcely paused for seven hours, and had gone a portion of
the distance at a very high rate, he saw that his friend was not far
out of the way.

It lacked yet several hours of dusk, when the trapper exclaimed:

'Yonder is an emigrant train, now make for 'em!'



                        CHAPTER VIII. INDIANS.

THE STEAM man was headed straight toward the emigrant train, and
advanced at a speed which rapidly came up with it.

They could see, while yet a considerable distance away, that they had
attracted notice, and the emigrants had paused and ware surveying them
with a wonder which it would be difficult to express.

It is said that when Robert Fulton's first steamboat ascended the
Hudson, it created a consternation and terror such as had never before
been known, many believing that it was the harbinger of the final
destruction of the world.

Of course, at this late day, no such excitement can be created by any
human invention, but the sight of a creature speeding over the country,
impelled by steam, and bearing such a grotesque resemblance to a
gigantic man, could not but startle all who should see it for the
first time.

The steam man advanced at a rate which was quite moderate, until
within a quarter of a mile of the astonished train, when the boy let
on a full head of steam and instantly bounded forward like a meteor.
As it came opposite the amazed company, the whistle was palled, and
it-gave forth a shriek hideous enough to set a man crazy.

The horses and animals of the emigrant train could be seen rearing and
plunging, while the men stood too appalled to do anything except gaze
in stupid and speechless amazement.

There were one or two, however, who had sense enough to perceive that
there was nothing at all very supernatural about it, and they shouted
to them to halt; but our two friends concluded it was not desirable to
have any company, and they only slackened their speed, without
halting.

But there was one of the emigrants who determined to know something
more about it and, mounting his horse, he started after it on a full
run. The trapper did not perceive him until he had approached quite
close, when they again put on a full head of steam, and they went
bounding forward at a rate which threatened to tear them to pieces.

But the keen perception of the boy had detected what they were able to
do without real risk: and, without putting his invention to its very
best, he kept up a speed which steadily drew them away from their
pursuer, who finally became discouraged, checked his animal, and
turned round and rode back to his friends, a not much wiser man.

This performance gave our friends great delight. It showed them that
they were really the owners of a prize whose value was incalculable.

'Ef the old thing will only last,' said Baldy, when they had sunk down
to a moderate trot again.

'What's to binder?'

'Dunno; yer oughter be able to tell. But these new-fangled things
generally go well at first, and then, afore yer know it, they bust all
to blazes.'

'No fear of this. I made this fellow so big that there is plenty of
room to have everything strong and give it a chance to work.'

'Wal, you're the smartest feller I ever seen, big or little. Whoever
heard of a man going by steam?'

'I have, often; but I never saw it. I expect when I go back to make
steam horses.'

'And birds, I s'pose?'

'Perhaps so; it will take some time to get such things in shape, but I
hope to do it after awhile.'

'Skulp me! but thar must be some things that you can't do, and I think
you've mentioned 'em.

'Perhaps so,' was the quiet reply. 'When you git through with this
'Western trip, what are you goin' to do with this old feller?'

'I don't know. I may sell him, if anybody wants him.'

'No fear of that; I'll take him off your hands, and give you a good
price for him.'

'What good will' he do you?'

'Why, you can make more money with him than Barnum ever did with his
Woolly Home.'

'How so?' inquired the boy, with great simplicity.

'Take him through the country and show him to the people. I tell yer
they'd run after such things. Get out yer pictures of him, and the
folks would break thar necks to see him. I tell yer, thar's a fortune
thar!'

The trapper spoke emphatically like one who knows.

As it was growing dusk, they deemed it best to look for some
camping-place. There was considerable danger in running at night, as
there was no moon, and they might run into some gully or ravine and
dislocate or wrench some portion of their machinery, which might
result in an irreparable catastrophe.

Before it was fairly dark they headed toward a small clump of trees,
where everything looked favorable.

'You see we must find a place where there is plenty water and fuel,
for we need both,' remarked the boy.

'Thar's plenty of wood, as yer see with yer eyes,' replied Baldy, 'and
when trees look as keen as that, thar's purty sure sign thar's water
not fur off.'

'That's all we want,' was the observation of the engineer as he headed
toward the point indicated.

Things were growing quite indistinct, when the steam man gave its last
puff, and came to rest in the margin of the grove. The fires were
instantly drawn, and every-thing was put in as good shape as possible,
by the boy, while the trapper made a tour of examination through the
grove. He came back with the report that everything was as they
wished.

'Thar's a big stream of water runnin' right through the middle, and
yer can see the wood fur yourself.'

'Any signs of Indians?' asked the boy, in a low voice, as if fearful
of being overheard. 'Dunno; it's too dark to tell.'

'If it's dangerous here, we had better go on.'

'Yer ain't much used to this part the world. You may keep powerful
easy till mornin'.'

As they could not feel certain whether in danger or not, it was the
part of prudence to believe that some peril threatened them.
Accordingly they ate their evening meal in silence, and curled up in
the bottom of their wagon, first taking the precaution to fill their
tank with water, and placing a portion of wood and kindlings in the
bowels of the steam man, so that in case of danger, they would be able
to leave at a short notice.

Johnny Brainerd was soon sound asleep, and the trapper followed, but
it was with that light, restless slumber which is disturbed by the
slightest noise.

So it came about that, but a few hours had passed, when he was aroused
by some slight disturbance in the grove. Raising his head he
endeavored to peer into the darkness, but he could detect nothing.

But he was certain that something was there, and he gently aroused the
boy beside him.

'What is it?' queried the latter in a whisper, but fully wide-awake.

'I think thar ar Ingins among the trees.' 'Good heavens! what shall we
do?'

'Keep still and don't git skeart! sh!' At this juncture he heard a
slight noise, and cautiously raising his head, he caught the outlines
of an Indian, in a crouching position, stealing along in front of the
wagon, as though examining the curious contrivance. He undoubtedly was
greatly puzzled, but he remained only a few minutes, when he withdrew
as silently as he had come.

'Stay yer, while I take a look around!' whispered Baldy, as he slid
softly out the wagon, while the boy did the same, waiting; until sure
that the trapper would not see him.

Baldy spent a half-hour in making his reconnoissance. The result of it
was that he found there were fully twenty Indians, thoroughly
wide-awake, who were moving stealthily through the grove.

When he came back, it was with the conviction that their only safety
lay in getting away without delay.

'We've got to learn,' said he, 'how long it will take yer to git up
steam, youngster?'

'There is a full head on now. I fired up the minute you left
the-wagon.'

'Good!' exclaimed Baldy, who in his excitement did not observe that
the steam man was seething, and apparently ready to explode with the
tremendous power pent up in its vitals.



                CHAPTER IX. THE STEAM MAN AS A HUNTER.

AT this juncture the trapper whispered that the Indians were again
stealing around them. Johnny's first proceeding was to pull the
whistle wide open, awaking the stillness of the night by a hideous,
prolonged screech.

Then, letting on the steam, the man made a bound forward, and the next
moment was careering over the prairie like a demon of darkness, its
horrid whistle giving forth almost one continual yell, such as no
American Indian has ever been able to imitate.

When they had gone a few hundred yards, Johnny again slackened the
speed, for there was great risk in going at this tremendous rate,
where all was entire blank darkness, and there was no telling into
what danger they might run. At the speed at which they were going they
would have bounded into a river before they could have checked
themselves.

'Yer furgot one thing,' said Baldy, when they had considerably
moderated their gait, and were using great caution.

'What is that?'

'Yer oughter had a lamp in front, so we could travel at night, jist as
well as day.'

'You are right; I don't see how I came to forget that. We could have
frightened the Indians more completely, and there would have been some
consolation in traveling at such a time.'

'Is it too late yet?'

'Couldn't do it without going back to St. Louis.'

'Thunderation! I didn't mean that. Go ahead.'

'Such a lamp or head-light as the locomotives use would cost several
hundred dollars, although I could have made one nearly as good for
much less. Such a thing in the center of a man's forehead, and the
whistle at the end of his nose, would give him quite an impressive
appearance.'

'Yer must do it, too, some day My God!'

The boy instantly checked their progress, as the trapper uttered his
exclamation; but quickly as it was done, it was none too soon, for
another long step and the steam man would have gone down an
embankment, twenty feet high, into a roaring river at the base. As it
was, both made rather a hurried leap to the ground, and ran to the
front to see whether there was not danger of his going down.

But fortunately he stood firm.

'I declare that was a narrow escape!' exclaimed the boy as he gazed
down the cavernous darkness, looking doubly frightful in the gloom of
the night.

'Skulp me if that wouldn't have been almost as bad as staying among
the red-skins,' replied the trapper. 'How are we goin' to get him out
of this?'

'We've got to shove him back ourselves.'

'Can't we reverse him?'

'No; he isn't gotten up on that principle.'

By great labor they managed to make him retrograde a few steps, so
that he could be made to shy enough to leave the dangerous vicinity,
and once more started upon the broad firm prairie.

'Do you suppose these Indians are following us?' inquired the boy.

'No fear of it.'

'Then we may as well stay here.'

The fires were drawn again, everything made right, and the two
disposed themselves again for spending the night in slumber.

No disturbance occurred, and both slept Roundly until broad daylight.
The trapper's first proceeding upon awakening was to scan the prairie
in every direction in quest of danger.

He was not a little amused to see a dozen or so mounted Indians about
a third of a mile to the west. They had reined up on the plain, and
were evidently scanning the strange object, with a great deal of
wonder, mixed with some fear.

'Do you think they will attack us?' inquired the boy, who could not
suppress his trepidation at the sight of the warlike savages, on their
gayly-caparisoned horses, drawn up in such startling array.

'Ef thar war any danger of that, we could stop 'em by 'tacking 'em.

'Jest fire up and start toward 'em, and see how quick they will
scatter.' The advice was acted upon on the instant, although it was
with no little misgiving on the part of the engineer.

All the time that the 'firingup' process was under way the savages sat
as motionless as statues upon their horses. Had they understood the
real nature of the 'animal,' it cannot be supposed that they would
rave hesitated for a moment to charge down upon it and demolish it
entirely.

But it was a terra incognita, clothed with a terror such as no array
of: enemies could wear, and they preferred to keep at a goodly
distance from it.

'Now, suppose they do not run?' remarked Johnny, rather doubtingly, as
he hesitated whether to start ahead or not.

'What if they don't? Can't we run another way? But yer needn't fear.
Jist try it on.'

Steam was let on as rapidly as possible, and the momentum gathering
quickly, it was soon speeding over the prairie at a tremendous rate,
straight toward the savages.

The latter remained motionless a few moments, before they realized
that it was coining after them, and then, wheeling about, they ran as
though all the legions of darkness were after them.

'Shall I keep it up?' shouted Johnny in the ear of the hunter.

'Yas; give 'em such a skear that they won't be able to git over it
ag'in in all thar lives.'

There is some fun in chasing a foe, when you know that he is really
afraid of you, and will keep running without any thought of turning at
bay, and the dwarf put the steam man to the very highest notch of
speed that was safe, even at the slight risk of throwing both the
occupants out.

The prairie was harder and nearer level than any over which they had
passed since starting, so that nothing was in the way of preventing
the richest kind of sport.

'Are we gaining?' inquired Johnny, his eyes glowing with excitement.

'Gaining? Thar never was a red-skin that had such a chase in all the
world. Ef they don't git out the way mighty soon, we'll run over 'em
all.'

They were, in truth, rapidly overhauling the red-skins, who were about
as much terrified as it was possible for a mortal to be, and still
live.

To increase their fears, the boy kept up a constant shrieking of his
whistle. If there had been any other contrivance or means at his
command, it is possible the red-skins would have tumbled off their
horses and died; for they were bearing almost all the fright, terror
and horror that can possibly be concentrated into a single person.

Finding there was no escape by means of the speed of their horses, the
Indians sensibly did what the trapper had prophesied they would do at
first.

They 'scattered,' all diverging over the prairie. As it was impossible
for the steam man to overtake all of these, of course, this expedient
secured the safety of the majority.

Neither Baldy nor the boy were disposed to give up the sport in this
manner; so, they singled out a single 'noble red-man,' who was
pursuing nearly the same direction as they were, and they headed
straight for him.

The poor wretch, when he saw that he was the object of the monster's
pursuit, seemed to become frantic with terror. Rising on his horse's
back, he leaned forward until it looked as though there was danger of
going over his head altogether. Then, whooping and shrieking to his
terrified horse, that was already straining every nerve, he pounded
his heels in its sides, vainly urging it to still greater speed.

In the mean time, the steam man was gaining steadily upon him, while
to add variety to the scene, Johnny kept up the unearthly shrieking of
the nose-whistle of the giant. It was difficult to tell which sounded
the most hideously in this strange chase.

The remaining Indians had improved their advantage to the utmost.
Fearful that their dreadful enemy might change its mind and single
them out, they kept up their tearing light, all regardless of the
great extremity to which their companion was reduced, until finally
they disappeared in the distance.

A short distance only separated pursuer and pursued, when the latter,
realizing that there was no escape in flight, headed toward the river,
which was a short distance on the right.

This saved him. When with a bowl, horse and rider thundered over the
bank and disappeared, the steam man could not follow him. He was
compelled to give up the chase and draw off. A few days later, and
without further noteworthy incident, the steam man reached Wolf
Ravine, being received in the manner narrated at the beginning of this
story.



                       CHAPTER X. WOLF RAVINE.

DURING THE absence of Baldy Bicknell in search of the steam man,
neither Mickey nor Ethan had been disturbed by Indians.

They had worked unceasingly in digging the gold mine to which they had
gained access through the instrumentality of the trapper. When they
had gathered together quite a quantity of the gravel and dirt, with
the yellow sand glittering through it, it was carried a short distance
to the margin of the river, where it underwent the 'washing' process.

While thus engaged, one of them was constantly running up the bank, to
make sure that their old enemies did not steal upon them unawares.
Once or twice they caught sight of several moving in the distance, but
they did not come near enough to molest them, doing nothing more than
to keep them on the qui vive.

There was one Indian, however, who bestrode a black horse, who haunted
them like a phantom. When they glanced over the river, at almost any
time, they could see this individual cautiously circling about on his
horse, and apparently waiting for a chance to get a shot at his
enemies.

'Begorrah, but he loves us, that he does, as the lamb observed when
speaking of the wolf,' said Mickey, just after he had sent a bullet
whistling about their ears.

'Jehosiphat! he loves us too much!' added the Yankee, who had no
relish for these stolen shots. 'If we ain't keerful, there'll be
nuthin' of us left when Baldy comes back, that is, if he comes back at
all.'

This red-skin on his black horse was so dangerous that he required
constant watching, and the men could perform only half their usual
work. It was while Mickey was on the lookout for him that he caught
sight of the steam man coming toward him, as we have related in
another place.

So long as that personage was kept puffing and tearing round the
vicinity, they knew there was no fear of disturbance from the
treacherous red-skins, who were so constantly on the alert to avenge
themselves for the loss they had suffered in the attack; but it would
hardly pay to keep an iron man as sentinel, as the wear and tear in
all probability would be too much for him.

After consulting together upon the return of Baldy, and after they had
ridden behind the steam man to their heart's content, they decided
upon their future course. As the boy, Johnny, had no intention of
devoting himself to manual labor, even had he been able, it was agreed
that he should take upon himself the part of sentinel, while the
others were at work.

In this way it was believed that they could finish within a couple of
weeks, bidding good-by to the Indians, and quickly reach the States
and give up their dangerous pursuits altogether, whereas, if compelled
to do duty themselves as sentinels, their stay would be doubly
prolonged.

This arrangement suited the boy very well, who was thereby given
opportunity to exercise his steam man by occasional airings over the
prairies. To the east and south the plains stretched away till the
horizon shut down upon them, as the sky does on the sea. To the west,
some twenty odd miles distant, a range of mountains was visible, the
peaks being tinged with a faint blue in the distance, while some of
the more elevated looked like white conical clouds resting against the
clear sky beyond.

From the first, young Brainerd expressed a desire to visit these
mountains. There was something in their rugged grandeur which invited
a close inspection, and he proposed to the trapper that they should
make a hunting excursion in that direction.

'No need of goin' so fur for game,' he replied, 'takes too much time,
and thar's sure to be red-skins.'

'But if we go with the steam man we shall frighten them all away,' was
the reply.

'Yas,' laughed Baldy, 'and we'll skear the game away too.'

'But we can overtake that as we did the poor Indian the other day.'

'Not if he takes to the mountains. Leastways yer isn't him that would
like to undertake to ride up the mountain behind that old gintle-man.'

'Nor I either, but we can leave the wagon when we get to the base of
the mountain.'

'And give the reds time to come down and run off with yer whole team.'

'Do you think there is danger of that?'

'Dunno as thar be, but ef they catched sight of yourself, they'd raise
yer ha'r quicker'n lightning.'

Seeing that the little fellow was considerably discouraged, Baldy
hastened to add:

'Ef you're keerful, younker, and I b'lieve yer generally be, take a
ride thar yerself, behind yer jumping-jack, but remember my advice and
stick to yer wagon.'

Having thus obtained permission of the hunter, Johnny Brainerd, as may
well be supposed, did not wait long before availing himself of his
privilege.

The weather, which had been threatening toward the latter part of the
day, entirely cleared away, and the next morning dawned remarkably
clear and beautiful. So the boy announced his intention of making the
expected visit, after which, he promised to devote himself entirely to
performing the duty of sentinel.

'Abeout what time may we look for you, neow!' asked Ethan, as he was
on the point of starting.

'Sometime this afternoon.'

'Come in before dark, as me mither used to observe to meself, when I
wint out shparkin',' added Mickey.

The boy promised to heed their warnings, and began firing up again.
The tank was completely filled with water, and the wagon filled nearly
full of wood, so that the two were capable of running the contrivance
for the entire day, provided there was no cessation, and that he was
on the 'go' continually.

Before starting, it was thoroughly oiled through and through, and put
in the best possible condition, and then waving them all a pleasant
farewell, he steamed gayly toward the mountains.

The ground was admirable, and the steam man traveled better than ever.
Like a locomotive, he seemed to have acquired a certain smoothness and
steadiness of motion, from the exercise he had already had, and the
sharp eye of the boy detected it at once. He saw that he had been very
fortunate indeed in constructing his wonderful invention, as it was
impossible for any human skill to give it any better movement than it
now possessed.

The first three or four miles were passed at a rattling gait, and the
boy was sitting on the front of his wagon, dreamily watching the play
of the huge engine, when it suddenly paused, and with such abruptness
that he was thrown forward from his seat, with violence, falling
directly between the legs of the monster, which seemed to stand
perfectly motionless, like the intelligent elephant that is fearful of
stirring a limb, lest he might crush his master lying beneath him.

The boy knew at once that some accident had happened, and unmindful of
the severe scratch he had received, he instantly clambered to his
feet, and began examining the machinery, first taking the precaution
to give vent to the surplus steam, which was rapidly gathering.

It was some time before he could discover the cause of difficulty, but
he finally ascertained that a small bolt had slipped loose, and had
caught in such a manner as to check the motion of the engine on the
instant.

Fortunately no permanent injury was done, and while he was making
matters right, he recollected that in chatting with the trapper as he
was on the point of starting, he had begun to screw on the bolt, when
his attention had been momentarily diverted, when it escaped his mind
altogether, so that he alone was to blame for the accident, which had
so narrowly escaped proving a serious one.

Making sure that everything was right, he remounted the wagon, and
cautiously resumed his journey, going very slowly at first, so as to
watch the play of the engine.

Everything moved with its usual smoothness, and lifting his gaze he
descried three buffaloes, standing with erect heads, staring
wonderingly at him.

'If you want a chase you may have it!' exclaimed the boy as he headed
toward them.



             CHAPTER XI. THE STEAM MAN ON A BUFFALO HUNT.

WITH A WILD snort of alarm, the three buffaloes turned tail and dashed
over the prairie, with the shrieking steam man in pursuit.

The boy had taken the precaution to bring a rifle with him. When he
saw them flee in this terrified manner, the thought came to him at
once that he would shoot one of them, and take a portion back to his
friends for their supper.

It would to a grand exploit for him, and he would be prouder of its
performance than he was of the construction of the wonderful steam
man.

The lumbering, rolling gait of the buffaloes was not a very rapid one,
and the boy found himself speedily overhauling them without
difficulty. They did not know enough to separate, but kept close
together, sometimes crowding and striking against each other in their
furious efforts to escape.

But, after the chase had continued some time, one of the animals began
to fall in the rear, and Johnny directed his attention toward him, as
he would be the most easy to secure.

This fellow was a huge bull that was slightly lame, which accounted
for his tardiness of gait. Frightened as he was, it was not that blind
terror which had seized the Indians when they discovered the steam man
so close at their heels. The bull was one of those creatures that if
closely pressed would turn and charge the monster. He was not one to
continue a fruitless flight, no matter who or what was his pursuer.

The boy was not aware of this sturdy trait in the animal, nor did he
dream of anything like resistance.

So he steadily drew toward him, until within twenty yards, when he let
go of his controlling rod, and picked up the rifle beside him. A
bullet from this, he supposed, would kill any animal, however large,
no matter at what portion of his body he aimed.

So raising partly to his feet, and steadying himself as well as he
could, he aimed for the lumping haunch of the animal. The ball buried
itself in his flank, and so retarded his speed, that the next moment
the boy found himself beside him.

The instant this took place, the bull lowered his head, and without
further warning, charged full at the steam man.

The boy saw the danger, but too late to stave it off. His immense head
struck the rear of the monster with such momentum that he was lifted
fully a foot from the ground, the concussion sounding like the crack of
a pistol.

Fortunately the shock did not materially injure the machine, although
the frightened boy expected to be capsized and killed by the
infuriated buffalo.

The latter, when he had made his plunge, instantly drew back for
another, which was sure to be fatal if made as fairly as the first.
The boy retained his presence of mind enough to let on full steam, and
the concern shot away at an extraordinary rate, bounding over the
ground so furiously that the billets of wood were thrown and scattered
in every direction, so that now, from being the pursuer, he had
speedily become the pursued. The tables were turned with a vengeance!

It was only by providential good fortune that young Brainerd escaped
instant destruction. The wonder was that the steam man was not so
injured as to be unable to travel, in which case the maddened bull
would have left little of him.

As it was, the experience of the boy was such as he could never
forget. When he turned his affrighted glance behind he saw the enraged
animal plunging furiously after him, his head lowered, his tongue out,
his eyes glaring, and his whole appearance that of the most brutal
ferocity.

Had the bull come in collision with the horse or man while in that
mood he would have made short work of him.

But great as was his speed, it could not equal that of the wonderful
steam man, who took such tremendous strides that a few minutes
sufficed to carry him beyond all danger.

Johnny quietly slacked off steam, but he kept up a good swinging gait,
not caring to renew his close acquaintance with his wounded enemy. The
latter speedily discovered he was losing ground, and finally gave up
the pursuit and trotted off at a leisurely rate to join his
companions, apparently none the worse for the slight wound he had
received.

As soon as the boy found himself beyond the reach of the animal's fury
he halted the man and made a minute examination of the machinery.

The head and horns of the buffalo had dented the iron skin of the
steam man, but the blow being distributed over a large area, inflicted
no other damage, if indeed this could be called damage of itself.

The boy was greatly pleased, not only at his escape but at the
admirable manner in which his invention had borne the shock of
collision. It gave him a confidence in it which hitherto he had not
felt.

Turning his face more toward the mountains, he again let on a good
head of steam and rattled over the prairie at a stirring rate. An hour
was sufficient to bring him to the base, where he halted.

He had not forgotten the warning of the trapper, but, like almost any
inexperienced person, he could not see any cause for alarm. He scanned
every part of the prairie and mountain that was in his field of
vision, but could detect nothing alarming.

He supposed the parting admonition of Baldy was merely a general
warning, such as a cautious person gives to one whom he has reason to
fear is somewhat careless in his conduct.

It therefore required little self-argument upon his part after putting
his man in proper 'condition,' to start off on a ramble up the
mountain side. It was not his intention to remain more than an hour or
so, unless he came across some game. He had a goodly quantity of
ammunition, and was careful that his rifle was loaded, so as not to be
taken unawares by any emergency.

Although Johnny Brainerd was afflicted with misshapen form, yet he was
very quick and active upon his feet, and bounded along over the rocks,
and across the chasms like a deer, with such a buoyancy of spirits
that he forgot danger.

However, he had gone but a short distance, when he was startled by a
low fierce growl, and turning his head, saw to his horror, that he had
nearly run against a colossal animal, which he at once recognized as
the dreaded grizzly bear.

Such a meeting would have startled an experienced hunter, and it was
therefore with no steady nerve that he hastily brought his piece to
his shoulder and fired.

The shot struck the bear in the body, doing just what his shot at the
buffalo had done some time before. It thoroughly angered him, without
inflicting anything like a serious wound. With a growl of fury the
brute made straight for him.

What would the boy have given, as he sped down the mountain side, were
he now in his wagon, whirled over the prairie at a rate which would
enable him to laugh to scorn any such speed as that of the brute.

At first he had hopes of reaching his refuge, but he was not long in
seeing that it was impossible, and found that if he escaped he must
find some refuge very speedily.

When he suddenly found himself beneath a goodly-sized tree it looked
like a providential indication to him, and throwing his gun to the
ground, he ascended the tree in the shortest time that he had ever
made.

He was none too soon as it was, for the bear was so close beneath him
that he felt the brush of its claws along his feet, as he nervously
jerked them beyond its reach.

Hastily scrambling to the very top of the tree, he secured himself
among the limbs, and then glanced down to see what his enemy was
doing. Great was his relief to find him sitting on his haunches,
contenting himself with merely casting wistful glances upward.

The sensation of even temporary safety was a relief, but when a full
hour had dragged by, with scarcely a single change of position upon
the part of the brute, Johnny began to ask himself what was to be the
end of all this.

It looked as though the grizzly had resolved in making his dinner upon
the youngster who had dared to fire a shot at him. The patience of an
animal is proverbially greater than that of a human being, and that of
the bear certainly exceeded to a great degree that of his expected
prey who crouched in the limbs above.



                    CHAPTER XII. THE GRIZZLY BEAR.

FROM WHERE young Brainerd was perched on the tree it was impossible to
catch a glimpse of the steam man, so patiently awaiting his return.
The distance was also too great for him to make himself beard by the
miners, who were hard at work twenty miles away.

Fruitful in expedients, it was not long before the boy found a
resource in his trouble. Tearing a large strip from his coat, he tore
this into smaller strips, until he had secured a rope half a dozen
yards in length. Upon the end of this he placed a loop, and then,
descending to the lowest limb, he devoted himself to the task of
drooping it over the end of his gun. It fortunately had fallen in such
a manner that the muzzle was somewhat elevated, so that here was a
good opportunity for the exercise of his skill and patience.

When the first attempt was made the bear suddenly clawed at it and
tore it from the boy's hand before he could jerk it beyond his reach.
So he was compelled to make another one.

Nothing discouraged, the boy soon had this completed, and it was
dropped down more cautiously than before. When the grizzly made a
lunge at it, it was deftly twitched out of his way.

This was repeated several times, until the brute became disgusted with
the sport, and dropping down behind the tree, let the boy do all the
fishing he chose.

Now was his time, but the boy did not allow his eagerness to overcome
the steadiness of his nerves. It required no little skill, but he
finally succeeded in dropping the noose over the muzzle of the gun and
jerked it up taut.

With a heart beating high with hope, Johnny saw it lifted clear of the
ground, and he began carefully drawing it up. The grizzly looked
curiously at his maneuvers, and once made as if to move toward the
dangling rifle; but, ere his mind was settled, it was drawn beyond his
reach, and the cold muzzle was grasped in the hand of the eagerly
waiting boy.

While drawing it up, he had been debating with himself as to the best
means of killing the brute. Remembering that his first shot had done
no harm, he sensibly concluded that he had not yet learned the
vulnerable part of the monster.

His gun was loaded very carefully, and when everything was ready he
made a noise, to attract the attention of the brute. The bear looked
up instantly, when the gun was aimed straight at his right eye.

Ere the grizzly could withdraw his gaze, the piece was discharged, and
the bullet sped true, crashing into the skull of the colossal brute.
With a howling grunt, he rose upon his hind feet, clawed the air a few
moments, and then dropped dead.

Young Brainerd waited until he was certain that the last spark of life
had fled, when he cautiously descended the tree, scarcely able to
realize the truth that he had slain a grizzly bear, the monarch of the
western wilderness. But such was the fact, and he felt more pride at
the thought than if he had slain a dozen buffaloes.

'If I only had him in the wagon,' he reflected, 'I'd take him into
camp, for they will never believe I killed a grizzly bear.'

However, it occurred to him that he might secure some memento, and
accordingly he cut several claws and placed them in his pocket. This
done, he concluded that, as the afternoon was well advanced, it was
time he started homeward.

His hurried flight from the ferocious brute had bewildered him
somewhat, and, when he took the direction he judged to be the right
one, he found nothing familiar or remembered, from which fact he
concluded he was going astray.

But a little computation on his part, and he soon righted himself, and
was walking along quite hopefully, when he received another severe
shock of terror, at hearing the unmistakable whoop of an Indian,
instantly followed by several others.

Immediately he recalled the warning given by the trapper, and looked
furtively about, to make sure that he was not already in their hands.
His great anxiety now was to reach the steam man and leave the
neighborhood, which was rapidly becoming untenable.

So he began stealing forward as rapidly as possible, at the same time
keeping a sharp lookout for danger. It required a half-hour,
proceeding at this rate, before reaching the base of the mountain. The
moment he did so, he looked all around in quest of the steam man, whom
he had been compelled to desert for so long a time.

He discovered it standing several hundred yards away; but, to his
dismay, there were fully a dozen Indians standing and walking about
it, examining every portion with the greatest curiosity.

Here was a dilemma indeed, and the boy began to believe that he had
gotten himself into an inextricable difficulty, for how to reach the
steam man and renew the fire, under the circumstances, was a question
which might well puzzle an older head to answer.

It was unfortunate that the machine should have been taken at this
great disadvantage, for it was stripping it of its terror to those
Indians, who were such inveterate enemies to the whites. They had
probably viewed it with wonder and fear at first; but finding it
undemonstrative, had gradually gathered courage, until they had
congregated around it, and made as critical a scrutiny as they know
how.

Whatever fear or terror they had felt at first sight was now gone; for
they seemed on the most familiar terms with it.

Several climbed into the wagon, others passed in and around the helpless
giant, and one valiant follow bit him a thwack on the stomach with his
tomahawk.

This blow hurt the boy far more than it did the iron man, and he could
hardly repress a cry of pain, as he looked upon the destruction of his
wonderful friend as almost inevitable.

The savage, however, contented himself with this demonstration, and
immediately after walked away toward the mountain. The observant boy
knew what this meant, and he withdrew from his temporary hiding-place,
and started to watch him.

The fact that the Indian followed precisely the path taken by him, did
not remove the uneasiness, and he made up his mind that nothing but
danger was to come to him from this proceeding.

When the Indian had reached the spot where the dead grizzly bear lay,
he paused in the greatest wonderment. Here was something which he did
not understand.

The dead carcass showed that somebody had slain him, and the shot in
the eye looked as though it had been done by an experienced hunter. A
few minutes' examination of the ground showed further that he who had
fired the shot was in the tree at the time, after which he had
descended and fled.

All this took but a few minutes for the savage to discover, when he
gave a whoop of triumph at his success in probing the matter, and
started off on the trail.

Unluckily, this led straight toward the bowlder behind which the boy
had concealed himself; and ere he could find a new hiding-place the
Indian was upon him.

At sight of the boy, the savage gave a whoop, and raised his tomahawk;
but the youngster was expecting this, and instantly raising his gun,
he discharged it full into his heart.

As he heard the shriek of the Indian, and saw him throw up his arms,
he did not wait to bear or see anything else, but instantly fled with
might and main, scarcely looking or knowing whither he was going.

A short time after he found himself at the base of the mountain, very
near the spot where he had first come, and glancing again toward the
steam man, he saw him standing motion less, as before, and with not a
single Indian in sight!



                  CHAPTER XIII. AN APPALLING DANGER.

NOT a second was to be lost. The next moment the boy had run across
the intervening space and pulled open the furnace door of the steam
man. He saw a few embers yet smoldering in the bottom, enough to
rekindle the wood. Dashing in a lot from the wagon, he saw it begin
blazing up. He pulled the valve wide open, so that there might not be
a moment's delay in starting, and held the water in the boiler at a
proper level. The smoke immediately began issuing from the pipe or
hat, and the hopes of the boy rose correspondingly.

The great danger was that the Indians would return before he could
start. He kept glancing behind him, and it was with a heart beating
with despair that he heard several whoops, and saw at the same instant
a number of red-skins coming toward him.

The boy gave a jolt to the wagon, which communicated to the steam man,
and it instantly started, at quite a moderate gait, but rapidly
increased to its old-fashioned run.

It was just in the nick of time, for two minutes later the savages
would have been upon him. As it was, when they saw the giant moving
off they paused for a moment in amazement.

But their previous acquaintance with the apparatus had robbed it of
all its supernatural attributes, and their halt lasted but a few
seconds. The next moment they understood that there was some human
agency about it, and uttering their blood-curdling yells, they started
in full pursuit. But by this time the steam gentleman was getting down
to his regular pace, and was striding over the prairie like a
dromedary. For a time the Indians gained, then the intervening
distance became stationary, and then he began pulling steadily away
from them.

Still the savages maintained the chase until satisfied of its
hopelessness, when they gave it up and sullenly withdrew in the
direction of the mountains.

The young fellow, in his triumph, could not avoid rising in the wagon,
shouting and waving his hat defiantly at his baffled pursuers. The
daring act came near costing his life, for it was instantly followed
by the discharge of several guns, and the singing of the bullets about
his ears caused him to duck back into his seat as suddenly as he had
risen from it.

The afternoon was now quite well advanced, and besides feeling hungry,
Johnny Brainerd was anxious to get back to camp.

The intervening distance was rapidly passed, and the sun was just
setting as he slacked up within a short distance of Wolf Ravine.

For some unaccountable reason, the nearer he approached 'camp,' as it
was called, a feeling akin to fear came over him. It was a
presentiment of coming evil, which he found it impossible either to
shake off or to define, and that was why he halted some distance away.

From where he stood it was impossible to see his two friends at work,
but at that time of day he knew they were accustomed to stop work and
come out upon the prairie for the purpose of enjoying the cool breeze
of evening. At the same time, when such constant danger threatened,
they were accustomed to have one of their number, either all or a part
of the time, on the ground above, where the approach of enemies could
be detected.

The absence of anything like a sentinel increased the boy's
apprehensions, and when he had waited some fifteen minutes without
seeing anything of his friends he became painfully uneasy.

'What if they had been killed? What if they were prisoners? What if a
hundred Indians were at that moment in the possession of Wolf Ravine?

Such and similar were the questions which the affrighted boy asked
himself, and which, with all his shrewdness, he was unable to answer.

In the hope of attracting attention he set up a shrieking with the
whistle, which sounded so loud on the still evening air that it must
have gone miles away over the level prairie.

There being no response to this he kept it up for some time, but it
still failed, and all this confirmed him in the belief that 'something
was up.'

What that particular something was it was impossible to say, so long
as he sat in the wagon, and for five minutes he endeavored to decide
whether it was best to get out and make a reconnoissance on his own
hook or remain where, in case of danger, he could seek safety in
flight.

As the day wore rapidly away, and he still failed to see or hear
anything of his friends, he finally concluded to get out and make an
examination of the ravine.

Accordingly he sprung lightly to the ground, but had scarcely alighted
when a peculiar signal, something resembling a tremulous whistle, reached
his ear, and he instantly clambered back again, fully satisfied that
the whistle was intended as a signal, and that it concerned him,
although whether from friend or foe he could only conjecture.

However, his alarm was such that he moved a hundred yards or so
further away from the ravine, where there was less likelihood of being
surprised by any sudden rush upon the part of the thieving red-skins.

From this standpoint he carefully scanned what could be seen of the
ravine. It descended quite gradually from the edge of the bank, so
that he gained a partial view of the rocks and bowlders upon the
opposite side. Some of the trees growing in the narrow valley rose to
such a height that one-half or two-thirds of them were exposed to
view.

It was while the boy was gazing at these that he detected a peculiar
movement in one of the limbs, which instantly arrested his attention.

A moment showed him that the peculiar waving motion was made by human
agency, and he strained his eyes in the hope of detecting the cause of
the curious movement.

The gathering darkness made his vision quite uncertain; but he either
saw, or fancied he saw, a dark object among the limbs which resembled
the form of Baldy Bicknell, the trapper.

Johnny Brainerd would have given almost anything in the world could he
have understood what it all meant.

But the vary fact of these singular demonstrations was prima facie
evidence of the most unquestionable kind; and, after a moment's
consultation with himself, he began moving away, just as the sharp
crack of several rifles notified him of the fearful peril which he had
escaped.



                    CHAPTER XIV. THE HUGE HUNTER.

SIMULTANEOUS with the report of the rifles came the pinging of the
bullets about the ears of young Brainerd, who, having started the
steam man, kept on going until he was a considerable distance from the
ravine.

All the time he kept looking back, but could see nothing of his
enemies, nor could he detect the point from which the rifle-shots were
fired.

Now, as night descended over the prairie, and the retreat of his
friends became shrouded in impenetrable darkness, he fully appreciated
the fact that not only were they in great danger, but so was he
himself.

The heathenish terror with which the steam man had at first inspired
the savages had rapidly worn away, the circumstances unfortunately
having been such that they had very speedily learned that it was
nothing more than a human invention, which of itself could accomplish
little or no harm.

He could but reflect, as the man glided slowly along, that if he had
the three friends beside him, how easily they could glide away in the
darkness and leave all danger behind.

But they were in the extremity of peril already, and, reflect and
cogitate as much as he chose, he could see no earthly way of assisting
them out of their difficulty.

Besides the concern which he naturally felt regarding his friends,
there was a matter that more clearly related to himself that demanded
his attention.

The water in the tank was at its lowest ebb, and it would be dangerous
for him to attempt to run more than one hour or so longer before
replenishing it. Consequently he was unable to stand anything like
another chase from the Indians.

As the part of prudence, therefore, he turned toward the river,
following slowly along the bank, in quest of some place where it would
be easy and safe for him to secure the much-needed water.

It was a long and discouraging hunt. The banks were so high that he
could find no point where it was safe for him to descend to the
water's edge. There was too great a risk of 'upsetting his cart,' a
calamity which, in all probability, would be irreparable.

At length, however, when he had wandered about a mile distant from the
Wolf Ravine, he discovered a place, where the bank had about six feet
elevation, and sloped down gradually to the river.

Here he paused, and with a small vessel, descended to the stream,
muttering to himself as he did so:

'Why didn't I think and put a pumping arrangement to the machine? I
could have done it as well as not, and it would have saved me a good
deal of trouble.'

But regrets were now unavailing, and he lost no time in useless
lamentations, setting to work at once. It was tedious labor, carrying
up the water in a small vessel, and emptying it in the tank, but he
persevered, and at the end of a couple of hours the task was
completed.

'I can make the wood stand me another day,' he added, as he stood
looking at the greatly diminished pile, 'although, if I knew where to
get it, I would load up now, and then I should be prepared.'

He suddenly paused, for scarcely a dozen yards away, coming up the
margin of the river, straight toward him, he descried the figure of a
man fully six feet and a half high.

Young Brainerd's first impulse was to spring into the wagon and start
away at full speed; but a second glance showed him that it was not an
Indian, but a white man, in the garb of a hunter.

'Hullo, boss, thar, what yer doin'?'

He was at a loss what reply to make, and therefore made none. The next
moment the giant hunter was beside him.

'B'ars and bufflers! younker, what ye got thar?' he demanded, eyeing
the steam man with an expression of the most amazed wonder. 'I say,
what do yer call that thing?'

'That,' laughed Johnny, who could not avoid a feeling of strong
apprehension at the singular appearance of the strange hunter, 'is a
sort of peregrinating locomotive.'

'Paggyratin' locomotive, what's that?' he asked, in a gruff voice, and
with an expression of great disgust at the unfamiliar words employed.

'You have seen a locomotive, haven't you?'

'Reckon I hev, down in St. Louey.'

'Well, this is something on the same principle, except that it uses
legs instead of wheels.'

'Can that ere thing walk?'

'Yes, sir, and run, too; it traveled all the way from the Missouri
river to this place.'

The huge hunter turned upon him with a fierce expression.

'Yer can't fool this yar boss in that style.'

'Don't you believe me?' asked the boy, who was fearful of offending
the stranger.

'No, sar; not a word.'

'How do you suppose we got it here?'

'Fotched in a wagon.'

'Let me show you what he can do.'

He was about to step into the wagon, when the hunter stopped him.

'See hyar, younker, who mought yer be?'

The boy gave his name and residence.

'What yer doin' hyar?'

'I'm traveling with this machine of mine.'

'How do you git it along?'

'I was just going to show you when you stopped me.'

'Hold on; no need of bein' in a sweat about it. Do yer come alone?'

'No. I came with a hunter.'

'What war his name?'

'Baldy Bicknell.'

'B'ars and bufflers! did yer come with him?'

'Yes; he was my companion all the way.'

'Whar mought he be?'

Johnny Brainerd hesitated a moment. While the huge hunter might
possibly be of great service to the beleaguered miners, yet he
recollected that it was the desire of Baldy that the fact of gold
existing in Wolf Ravine should be kept a secret from all except their
own party.

Should it become known to any of the numerous hunters and emigrants
who were constantly passing in the neighborhood, there would be such a
flocking to the place that they would be driven away and probably
killed for the treasure that they had already obtained.

The boy, therefore, chose to make a non-committal reply:

'Baldy is some distance away, in camp.'

'And what are yer doin' hyar?'

'I stopped here to get water for this steam man, as we call him. You
know anything that travels by steam must have the water to generate
it.'

'I say, younker, I don't want none of yer big words to me. Ef I h'ar
any more, b'ars and bufflers, ef I don't crack yer over the head with
Sweetlove, my shootin'-iron, so mind what yer say, fur I won't stand
no nonsense.'

'I didn't wish to offend you,' returned the boy, in the meekest of
tones.

'How far away might be Baldy?'

'I couldn't tell you exactly, but I think it is less than ten miles.'

'Be you goin' back to camp to-night?'

'It was my intention, that is, I meant to do so.'

'Guess I'll go with yer; but see hyar, younker, let's see yer try that
old humbug of yourn.'

The boy sprung into the wagon, glad of the opportunity of getting rid
of what looked like a dangerous man. Before he could start he was
again peremptorily stopped.

'Yer see, I b'leeve yar a humbug, but if that ole thing does run, and,
mind, I tell yer, I don't b'leeve it will, do yer know what I'm goin'
to do?'

'I do not.'

'I'm goin' to take it myself to chase rod-skins in. It won't bother
yer much fur them long legs of yourn to carry that humpback home
again. So, younker, start now, and let us see what yer can do.'

The boy let on steam, and the man started off on a moderate gait,
which rapidly increased to a swift one. The huge, wonder-stricken
hunter watched it until it gradually faded out of sight in the gloom,
and still watched the place where it had disappeared, and though he
watched much longer, with a savage and vindictive heart, yet it never
came back to him again.



                CHAPTER XV. THE ATTACK IN THE RAVINE.

IN THE mean time, the situation of our friends in Wolf Ravine was
becoming perilous to the last degree.

Before going to work, on the morning of the steam man's excursion to
the mountains, Baldy Bicknell made a reconnoissance of the ravine, to
assure himself that there was no danger of being suddenly overwhelmed,
while delving for the precious yellow sand.

He saw abundant signs of Indians having recently visited the place,
but he concluded there were none in the immediate vicinity, and that
comparatively little risk was run in the boy making his wished-for
visit to the mountains in the west.

Through the center of the ravine ran a small stream of water, hardly
of enough volume to be used for washing gold without a dam being
created. It looked as if this had once been the head of a large
stream, and that the golden sand had been drifted to this spot, by the
force of the powerful current.

The auriferous particles were scattered over the entire breadth of the
ravine, for the distance of several hundred feet, being found in the
richest deposits between the ledges and rocks, in the bottom of the
channel, where, as may well be supposed, it was no easy matter to
obtain.

A short distance back of the 'diggings,' where the vast masses of
rocks assumed curiously grotesque forms, the miners discovered a rude
cave, where they at once established their headquarters. A tiny stream
ran through the bottom of it, and with a little placing of the close
bowlders, they speedily put it in the best condition of defense.

It was almost entirely surrounded by trees, there was one spot where a
thin man, like Hopkins or Baldy, could draw his body through and climb
a luxuriant cottonwood, whose top have a wide view of the surrounding
plain.

The day passed away without any signs of Indians, Baldy occasionally
ascending the side of the ravine, and scanning the plains in every
direction, on the constant lookout for the insidious approach of their
enemies.

Just before nightfall, while all three were at work, a rifle was
discharged, and the bullet was imbedded in the tough oaken handle of
the spade with which the trapper was digging.

'Whar in thunder did that come from?' he demanded, dropping the
implement, catching up the rifle, and glaring savagely about him.

But neither of the others could answer him, and climbing up the bank,
he looked fiercely around for some evidence of the whereabouts of his
treacherous foe.

The latter remained invisible, but several hundred yards down the
ravine, he caught a glimpse of enough Indians dodging hither and
thither to satisfy him that there was quite a formidable force in the
valley.

Giving the alarm to his companions, all three withdrew within the
cave, not the less willingly, as it was very near their usual quitting
time.

'Begorrah! and what'll becoom of the shtame mian and the boy?'
inquired Mickey, as he hastily obeyed orders.

'Jerusalem!' exclaimed the Yankee, in great trepidation, 'if he isn't
warned, they'll catch him sure, and then what'll become of us? We'll
have to walk all the way hum.'

As the best means of communicating with him, the trapper climbed
through the narrow opening, and to the top of the tree, where he
ensconced himself, just as the steam man uttered its interrogative
whistle.

The trapper, as we have shown in another place, replied by pantomime,
not wishing to discover his whereabouts to the enemy, as he had a dim
idea that this means of egress might possibly prove of some use to
him, in the danger that was closing around them.

When Johnny Brainerd recognized his signal, and beat a retreat, Baldy
began a cautious descent to his cave again. At this time it was
already growing dark, and he had to feel his way down again.

And so it came about, that not until he had reached the lowest limb,
did his trained ear detest a slight rustling on the ground beneath.
Supposing it to be either Mickey or Ethan, he continued his descent,
merely glancing below. But at that moment something suspicious caught
his eye, and peering down more carefully, he discovered a crouching
Indian, waiting with drawn knife until he should come within his
reach.

The trapper was no coward, and had been in many a hand to-hand tussle
before; but there was something in the character of the danger which
would have made it more pleasant for him to hesitate awhile until he
could learn its precise dimensions; but time was too precious, and the
next moment, he had dropped directly by the side of the red-skin.

The latter intended to make the attack, but without waiting for him,
Baldy sprung like a panther upon him and bore him to the earth. There
was a silent but terrific struggle for a few moments, but the
prodigious activity and rower of the trapper prevailed, and when he
withdrew from the grasp of the Indian, the latter was as dead as a
door nail. The struggle had been so short that neither Mickey nor
Ethan knew anything of it, until Baldy dropped down among them, and
announced what had taken place.

'Jerusalem! have they come as close as that?' asked the Yankee in
considerable terror.

'Skulp me, if they ain't all around us!' was the reply of the hunter.

'How we ar' to git out o' hyar, ar' a hard thing to tell j'ist now.'

'It's meself that thinks the rid gentlemin have a love fur us, as me
mither obsarved, when she cracked the head of me father,' remarked
Mickey, who had seated himself upon the ground with all the
indifference of an unconcerned spectator.

It was so dark in their cave-like home that they could not see each
other's faces, and could only catch a sort of twilight glimpse of
their forms when they passed close to each other.

It would have made their quarters more pleasant had they struck a
light, but it was too dangerous a proceeding, and no one thought of
it. They could only keep on the alert, and watch for the movement of
their enemies.

The latter, beyond all doubt, were in the immediate vicinity, and
inspired as they were by hate of the most vindictive kind, would not
allow an opportunity to pass of doing all the harm in their power.

The remains of their food was silently eaten in the darkness, when
Baldy said:

'Do yer stay hyar whar ye be till I come back'

'Where might ye be going naow?' inquired Hopkins.

'I'm goin' outside to see what the reds are doin', and to see whether
thar's a chance fur 'em to gobble us up hull.'

'Do yees mind and take care of y'urself, as me mither cautioned me
when I went a shparkin',' said Mickey, who naturally felt some
apprehension, when he saw the trapper on the point of leaving them at
such a dangerous time.

'Yes. Baldy, remember that my fate is wrapped up in yours,' added the
Yankee, whose sympathies were probably excited to a still greater
extent.

'Never mind about Baldy; he has been in such business too often not to
know how to take care of himself.'

'How long do you expect to begone?'' inquired Ethan.

'Mebbe all night, if thar ain't much danger. Ef I find the varments
ar' too thick I'll stay by yer, and if they ain't I'll leave fur
several hours. Leastways, whatever I do, you'll be sure to look out
for the skunks.'

With this parting admonition, the trapper withdrew.

In going out, he made his exit by the same entrance by which all had
come in. He proceeded with great caution, for none knew better than he
the danger of a single misstep. He succeeded, after considerable time,
in reaching a portion of the valley so shrouded in gloom that he was
able to advance without fear of discovery.

He thoroughly reconnoitered every part of the ravine in the immediate
vicinity of the cave, but could discover nothing of the Indians, and
he concluded that they were some distance away.

Having assured himself of this, the trapper cautiously ascended the
side of the ravine, until he reached the open prairie, when he lost no
time in leaving the dangerous place behind him.

He had no intention, however, of deserting his friends, but had simply
gone in quest of the steam man. He comprehended the difficulty under
which they all labored, so long as they were annoyed in this manner by
the constant attacks of the savages, and he had an idea that the
invention of the dwarfed Johnny Brainerd could be turned to a good
account in driving the miscreants away so thoroughly that they would
remain away for a long enough time for them to accomplish something in
the way of gathering the wealth lying all about them.

He recalled the direction which he had seen the puffing giant take,
and he bent his steps accordingly, with only a faint hope of meeting
him without searching the entire night for him. Baldy was shrewd
enough to reason that as the boy would wish some water for his engine,
he would remain in the immediate vicinity of the river until at least
that want could be supplied.

Acting on this supposition, he made his way to the river bank, and
followed so closely to the water that its moonlit surface was
constantly visible to him.

The night was still, and, as he moved silently along, he often paused
and listened, hoping to hear the familiar rattle of the wheels, as the
youngster sped over the prairie.

Without either party knowing it, he passed within a few yards of Duff
McIntosh, the huge trapper, whom he had known so intimately years
before.

But had he been aware of the fact, he would only have turned further
aside, to avoid him; for, when the two trappers, several years
previous, separated, they had been engaged in a deadly quarrel, which
came near resulting fatally to both.

At length the faint rattle of the wheels caught his ear, and he bent
his steps toward the point where he judged the steam man to be.



                      CHAPTER XVI. THE REPULSE.

A FEW minutes more satisfied the trapper that he was right. Gradually
out from the darkness the approaching figure resolved itself into the
steam man.

Johnny Brainerd, after leaving the huge trapper so neatly, continued
wandering aimlessly over the prairie at a moderate speed, so as to
guard against the insidious approach of the Indians, or the hunter who
had threatened to confiscate his property in so unjustifiable a
manner.

Fortunately he did not see Baldy until the latter cautiously hailed
him, otherwise he would have fled before ascertaining his identity;
but the moment he recognized his voice he hastened toward him, no less
surprised than pleased at meeting him so unexpectedly.

'Where are Mickey and Ethan?' he inquired, as he leaped alongside of
him.

'In the cave.'

'How is it you are here?'

The trapper briefly explained that he had crept out to hunt him up;
but as there seemed no imminent danger, he deemed it best to leave his
companions there, as if the Indians once gained possession of the
golden ravine, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to displace
them.

Besides, in order to carry out the scheme which he had formed, it was
necessary that two at least should remain in the cave, while the
others were on the outside.

Under the direction of the trapper, the steam man slowly approached
the ravine, keeping at a respectful distance, but so near that if any
sudden emergency should arise, they would be able to render assistance
to their friends.

The boy gave several whistles so as to inform the Irishman and Yankee
of their whereabouts. A few seconds after, and while the noise of the
instrument was echoing over the prairie, a fainter whistle reached
their ears.

'That's the long-legged Yankee!' instantly remarked the trapper; 'he
knows how to make my kind of noise.'

'What does it mean?'

'It means that all is right.'

'Where are the Indians?'

'They ain't fur off. I wish they war further, fur ef it warn't fur
them, we'd had half the yaller metal out of thar by this time.'

Young Brainerd had the reputation of possessing a remarkably keen
vision; but, peer as much as he might, he could detect nothing
unusual. The trapper, however, affirmed that numerous forms could be
seen creeping along-the edge of the prairie, and that these same forms
were more nor less than so many red-skins.

'What are they trying to do?'

'Duono.'

'Hadn't we better withdraw?' inquired Johnny, showing a little
nervousness.

'Not till we know they're after us,' was the quiet reply.

By and by the boy himself was able to get an occasional glimpse of the
shadowy figures moving to and fro.

'I think they are going to surround us,' he added, 'and I feel as
though we ought to get out while we can do so.'

The only reply to this, was by the trapper suddenly bringing his gun
to his shoulder and firing. An agonizing screech, as the savage threw
himself in the air, showed that the shot had not been in vain.

Rather curiously at the same moment the report of a gun in the ravine
reached their ears, followed by the same death-shriek.

'They ain't sleepin' very powerful down thar,' was the pleased remark
of the trapper, as he leisurely reloaded his piece, while the boy
remained in that nervous state, awaiting the permission of Baldy to go
spinning away over the prairie at a rate that would very quickly carry
him beyond all danger.

But the trapper was in no hurry to give the ardently desired
permission. He seemed to have a lingering affection for the place,
which prevented his 'tearing himself away.'

The boy's timidity was not in the least diminished, when several
return shots were fired, the bullets pinging all around them.

'My gracious, Baldy, let's get out of this!' he instantly pleaded,'
starting the man himself.

'Go about fifty feet,' was the reply, 'but not any further.'

It may be said that the steam man fairly leaped over this space, and
somewhat further, like a frightened kangaroo, and even then it would
not have halted had not the trapper given peremptory orders for it to
do so.

The sky was now clear and the moon, riding high and nearly full,
illumined the prairie for a considerable distance, and there was no
fear but that they could detect the approach of the most treacherous
savage, let him come in whatever disguise he chose.

The night wore gradually away, without any particular demonstration
upon the part of either the Indians or white men, although dropping
shots were occasionally exchanged, without any particular result on
either side.

Now and then a red-skin, creeping cautiously along, made his
appearance on the edge of the ravine; but there was too much light for
him to expose himself to the deadly rifle of the trapper, who took a
kind of savage pleasure in sending his leaden messengers after the
aborigines.

This species of sport was not without its attendant excitement and
danger; for the last creature to take a shot quietly is an American
Indian; and they kept popping away at the steam man and its train
whenever a good opportunity offered.

Owing to the size and peculiar appearance of the steamer, he was a
fair target for his enemies; and, indeed, so uncomfortably close did
some of the bullets come, that the boy almost continually kept his
head lowered, so as to be protected by the sides of the wagon.

Finally morning came, greatly to the relief of all our friends. As
soon as it was fairly light the Irishman and Yankee were notified that
a move was about to be made, by means of the steam-whistle. An
answering signal coming back to them, the steam man at once advanced
to the very edge of the ravine.

The trapper peering cautiously down the gulch, caught sight of several
red-skins crouching near the cave, and, directing young Brainerd to
discharge his piece at a certain one, the two fired nearly together.
Scarce five seconds had elapsed, when both Ethan and Mickey did the
same. All four, or rather three, as the boy gave his principal attention
to the engine, began loading and firing as rapidly as possible.

The red-skins returned a few scattering shots; but they were taken at
such disadvantage, that they immediately began a precipitate retreat
down the ravine.

Ere they had withdrawn a hundred yards, Ethan and Mickey emerged from
the cave, shouting and excited, firing at every red-skin they could
see, the Irishman occasionally swinging his gun over his head, and
daring the savages to a hand-to-hand encounter.

While the two were thus engaged, the trapper was not idle. The steam
man maintained his place but a short distance behind the enemies, and
his deadly rifle scarcely ever failed of its mark.

The moment an Indian was killed or helplessly wounded, his companions
caught and dragged him away, there being a great fear upon the part of
all that some of their number might fall into the hands of their
enemies, and suffer the ineffaceable disgrace of being scalped.

The savages were followed a long distance, until their number had
diminished down to a fraction of what it was originally, and the
survivors had all they could do in 'taking care of their disabled
comrades.

Never was victory more complete. The Indians were thoroughly
discomfited, and only too glad to get away after being so severely
punished. During this singular running fight the steam man kept up a
constant shrieking, which doubtless contributed in no slight degree to
the rout of the red-skins. They fired continually at the
fearful-looking monster, and, finding their shots produced no effect,
invested the thing with a portion of the supernatural power which they
had given it at first sight.

When the last glimpse of the retreating Indians was seen, the trapper
turned triumphantly toward the boy.

'Warn't that purty well done, younker?'

'It was indeed.'

'They'll now stay away awhile.'

'We would have failed if we had waited any longer.'

'Why so, boy?'

'Because the last stick is burned, and the steam man couldn't be made
to run a mile further without more fuel.'



                    CHAPTER XVII. HOMEWARD BOUND.

THE PUNISHMENT administered to the Indians who had so greatly annoyed
the miners proved a very beneficial one.

Nothing more was seen of them, except one or two glimpses of the
red-skin upon his black horse. He, however, maintained a respectful
distance, and at the end of a day or two disappeared altogether.

These were golden moments indeed to the miners, and they improved them
to the utmost. From earliest light until the darkness of night they
toiled almost unceasingly. Half the time they went hungry rather than
stop their work to procure that which was so much needed. When,
however, the wants of nature could no longer be trifled with, Baldy
took his rifle and started off on a hunt, which was sure to be brief
and successful.

Sometimes he caught sight of some game in the gulch, and sometimes
something in the air drew the fire of his unerring rifle, and the
miners feasted and worked as only such violently laboring men can do.

Although the boy was unable to assist at the severe labor, yet he soon
demonstrated his genius and usefulness. He not only constructed a dam,
but made a 'rocker,' or machine, of an original style, that did the
work far more expeditiously and thoroughly than it had yet been done.

While the men were getting the auriferous sand, he separated it from
the particles of dirt and gravel, without any assistance from them,
and without any severe labor for himself.

There was some apprehension upon the part of all that the huge
trapper, whom young Brainerd had met at night, would make his
appearance. Should he do so, it would be certain to precipitate a
difficulty of the worst kind, as he was morose, sullen, treacherous,
envious and reckless of danger.

Baldy Bicknell really feared him more than he did the Indians, and the
constant watchfulness he exercised for several days showed how great
was his apprehension.

Fortunately, indeed, for all concerned, the giant hunter continued his
travels in a different direction, and the miners were undisturbed by
him.

Two weeks passed, by the end of which time the ravine was about
exhausted of its precious stuff, and the miners made their
preparations for going home.

It was impossible to do anything more than conjecture the amount of
wealth they had obtained, but Baldy was sure that there was enough,
when sold, to buy each of them a handsome farm.

'Jerusalem! but naow ain't that good?' exclaimed the delighted Ethan
Hopkins, as he mopped off his perspiring forehead. 'That 'ere
encourages me to take a step that I've often contemplated.'

'What might the same be?'

'Git married: me and Seraphenia Pike hev been engaged for the last ten
years, and now I'll be hanged ef I don't go home and get spliced.'

'And it's myself that'll do the same,' added Mickey, as he executed an
Irish jig on the barren earth in front of their cavern home, after
they had concluded to leave the place.

'Where does she reside?' inquired Ethan.

'Ballyduff, Kings County, in the Oim of the Sea; it's there that lives
the lass that's to have the honor of becoming Mrs. McSquizzle, and
becomin' the mither of her own children. Arrah, but isn't the same a
beauty?'

'The same as my own, Michael,' ventured the Yankee, who deemed it his
duty to correct this general remark of his friend.

'Arrah, now, get cut wid ye! she can't begin wid Miss Bridget
Moghlaghigbogh that resides wid her mither and two pigs on the
outskirts of Ballyduff, in the wee cabin that has the one room and the
one windy. Warrah, warrah, now isn't she a jewel?'

'And so is Seraphenia.'

'But has she the rid hair, that makes it onnecessary for them to have
the candle lit at night? and has she the same beautiful freckles, the
size of a ha'penny, on the face and the nose, that has such an iligant
turn up at the end, that she used to hang her bonnet on it? Arrah,
now, and didn't she have the swate teeth, six of the same that were so
broad that they filled her mouth, and it was none of yer gimblet holes
that was her mouth, but a beautiful one, that, when she smiled went
round to her ears, did the same. And her shoes! but you orter seen
them.'

'Why so?'

'What was the matter with her shoes?'

'Nothing was the same. They was the shoes that the little pigs went to
slaap in, afore they got so big that they couldn't git in them, and
then it was her brother that used one of them same for a trunk when he
emigrated to Amenity. Arrah, now, but wasn't me own Bridget a jewel?'

'Jehosephat! I should think she was!' exclaimed Hopkins, who had
listened in amazement to this enumeration of the beauties of the
gentle Irish lass, who had won the affections of Mickey McSquizzle.
'No doubt she had a sweet disposition.'

'Indeed she had, had she; it was that of an angel, was the same. It
was niver that I staid there a night coorting the same that she didn't
smash her shillaleh to smithereens over me head. Do yees obsarve
that?' asked Mickey, removing his hat, and displaying a scar that
extended half way across his head.

'I don't see how any one can help seeing that.'

'Well, that was the parting salute of Bridget, as I started for
Ameriky. Arrah, now, but she did the same in style.'

'That was her parting memento, was it?'

'Yes; I gave her the black eye, and she did the same fur me, and I
niver takes off me hat to scratch me head that I don't think of the
swate gal that I left at home.'

And thereupon the Irishman began whistling 'The Girl I Left Behind
Me,' accompanying it with a sort of waltzing dance, kept with
remarkably good time.

'And so you intend to marry her?' inquired Hopkins, with no little
amazement.

'It's that I do, ef I finds her heart fraa when I return to Ballyduff,
You know, that the loikes of her is sought by all the lads in Kings
County, and to save braaking their hearts, she may share the shanty of
some of 'em.'

'Jerusalem! but she is the all-firedest critter I ever heard tell on.'

'What does ye maan by that?' demanded the Irishman, instantly flaring
up; 'does ye maan to insinooate that she isn't the most charming
craater in the whole counthry?'

'You'll allow me to except my own Seraphenia?'

'Niver a once.'

'Then I'll do it whether you like it or not Your gal can't begin with
mine, and never could.'

'That I don't allow any man to say.'

And the Irishman immediately began divesting himself of his coat,
preparatory to settling the difference in the characteristic Irish
manner. Nothing loth, the Yankee put himself in attitude, determined
to stand up for the rights of his fair one, no matter by whom
assailed.

Matters having progressed so far, there undoubtedly would have been a
set-to between them, had not the trapper interfered. He and the boy
were engaged in preparing the steam man and wagon for starting, when
the excited words drew their attention, and seeing that a fight was
imminent, Baldy advanced to where they stood and said:

'Not another word, or skulpme ef I don't hammer both of you till
thar's nothin left o' you.'

This was unequivocal language, and neither of the combatants
misunderstood it. All belligerent manifestations ceased at once, and
they turned to in assisting in the preparations for moving.

When all four were seated in the wagon, with their necessary baggage
about them, it was found that there was comparatively little room for
the wood. When they had stored all that they could well carry, it was
found that there was hardly enough to last them twelve hours, so that
there was considerable risk run from this single fact.

The steam man, however, stepped off with as much ease as when drawing
the wagon with a single occupant. The boy let on enough of steam to
keep up a rattling pace, and to give the assurance that they were
progressing home ward in the fastest manner possible.

Toward the middle of the afternoon a storm suddenly came up and the
rain poured in torrents.

As the best they could do, they took refuge in a grove, where, by
stretching the canvas over themselves and the steam man, they managed
to keep free from the wet.

The steam man was not intended to travel during stormy weather, and so
they allowed him to rest.



                    CHAPTER XVIII. THE ENCAMPMENT.

THE STORM proved the severest which the steam man had encountered
since leaving St. Louis, and it put an effectual veto on his travels
during its continuance, and for a short time afterward.

The prairie was found so soft and slippery that they were compelled to
lie by until the sun had hardened it somewhat, when they once more
resumed their journey.

As they now had thousands of dollars in their possession, and as all
sorts of characters were found on the western plains, it may be said
that none of the company ever felt easy.

Baldy Bicknell, the trapper, from his extensive experience and
knowledge of the West, was the guide and authority on all matters
regarding their travels. He generally kept watch during the night,
obtaining what sleep he could through the day. The latter, however,
was generally very precarious, as at sight of every horseman or cloud
of smoke, they generally awakened him, so as to be sure and commit no
serious error.

As the steam man would in all probability attract an attention that
might prove exceedingly perilous to the gold in their possession, the
trapper concluded it prudent to avoid the regular emigrant routes.
Accordingly they turned well to the northward, it being their purpose
to strike the Missouri, where they would be pretty sure of
intercepting some steamer. Reaching such a place they would unjoint
and take apart the steam man, packing it up in such a manner that no
one could suspect its identity, and embark for St. Louis.

While this relieved them of the danger from their own race, it
increased the probability of an attack upon the Indians, who scarcely
ever seemed out of sight.

Their watchfulness, however, was constant, and it was due to this
fact, more than any other, that they escaped attack at night for the
greater part of their return journey.

Their position in the wagon was so cramped, that the party frequently
became excessively wearied, and springing out, trotted and walked for
miles alongside the tireless steam giant. Water was abundant, but
several times they were put to great inconvenience to obtain wood. On
three occasions they were compelled to halt for half a day in order to
obtain the necessary supply.

Once the steam man came to a dead standstill in the open prairie, and
narrowly escaped blowing up. A hasty examination upon the part of the
inventor, revealed the fact that a leak had occurred in the tank, and
every drop had run out..

This necessitated the greatest work of all, as water was carried the
better part of a mile, and nearly an entire day consumed before enough
steam could be raised to induce him to travel to the river, to procure
it himself, while the miners acted as convoys.

Late one afternoon, they reached a singular formation in the prairie.
It was so rough and uneven that they proceeded with great difficulty
and at a slow rate of speed. While advancing in this manner, they
found they had unconsciously entered a small narrow valley, the bottom
of which was as level as a ground floor. The sides contracted until
less than a hundred feet separated them, while they rose to the hight
of some eight or ten feet, and the bottom remained compact and firm,
making it such easy traveling for the steam man, that the company
followed down the valley, at a slow pace, each, however, feeling some
misgiving as to the propriety of the course.

'It runs in the right direction,' said young Brainerd, 'and if it only
keeps on as it began, it will prove a very handy thing for us.'

'Hyar's as afeared it ain't goin' to keep on in that style,' remarked
Baldy; 'howsumever, you can go ahead awhile longer.'

'Naow, that's what I call real queer,' remarked Ethan Hopkins, who was
stretching his legs by walking alongside the steamer.

'And it's meself that thinks the same,' added Mickey, puffing away at
his short black pipe. 'I don't understand it, as me father obsarved
when they found fault with him for breaking another man's head.'

'Ef we git into trouble, all we've got ta do is to back out,' remarked
Baldy, as a sort of apology for continuing his advance.

'This fellow doesn't know how to go backward,' said Johnny, 'but if it
prove necessary, we can manage to turn him round.'

'All right, go ahead.'

At the same moment, the limber Yankee sprung into the wagon, and the
steam man started ahead at a speed which was as fast as was prudent.

However, this delightful means of progress was brought to an
unexpected standstill, by the sudden and abrupt termination of the
valley. It ended completely as though it were an uncompleted canal,
the valley rising so quickly to the level of the prairie, that there
was no advancing any further, nor turning, nor in fact was there any
possible way of extricating themselves from the difficulty, except by
working the steam man around, and withdrawing by the same path that
they had entered by.

'Well, here we are' remarked the boy, as they came to a standstill,
'and what is to be done?'

'Get out of it,' was the reply of Hopkins, who advanced several yards
further, until he came up on the prairie again, so as to make sure of
the exact contour of the ground.

'Did yer ever try to make the thing go up hill?' asked the trapper.

Young Brainerd shook his head. 'Impossible! he would fall over on us,
the minute it was attempted. When I was at work at first making him,
what do you think was the hardest thing for me to do?'

'Make him go, I s'pose.'

'That was difficult, but it was harder work to balance him, that is, so
when he lifted up one foot he wouldn't immediately fall over on the
same side. I got it fixed after a while, so that he ran as evenly and
firmly as an engine, but I didn't fix upon any plan by which he could
ascend or descend a hill.'

'Can't you make him do it?'

'Not until he is made over again. I would be afraid to attempt to walk
him up a moderate inclination, and know it would be sure destruction
to start him up such a steep bank at that.'

'Then we must work him round, I s'pose.'

'There is nothing else that can be done.'

'Let's at it, then.'

This proved as difficult a job as they imagined. The steam man was so
heavy that it was impossible to lift him, but he was shied around as
much as possible; and, by the time he had walked across the valley he
had half turned round.

He was then coaxed and worked back a short distance, when, with the
'leverage' thus gained, the feat was completed, and the steam man
stood with his face turned, ready to speed backward the moment that
the word might be given.

By this time, however, the day was gone, and darkness was settling
over the prairie. Quite a brisk breeze was blowing, and, as the
position of the party was sheltered against this annoyance, Hopkins
proposed that they should remain where they were until morning.

'We couldn't get a better place,' said Johnny Brainerd, who was quite
taken with the idea.

'It's a good place and it's a bad one,' replied the trapper, who had
not yet made up his mind upon the point.

They inquired what he meant by calling it a bad place.

'Ef a lot of the varmints should find we're hyar, don't you see what a
purty fix they'd have us in?'

'It would be something like the same box in which we caught them in
Wolf Ravine,' said young Brainerd.

'Jist the same, perzactly.'

'Not the same, either,' said Hopkins; 'we've got a better chance of
getting out than they had. We can jump into the wagon and travel,
while they can't; there's the difference.'

'S'pose they git down thar ahead of us, how ar' we goin' to git away
from them then?

'Run over them.'

'Don't know whether the younker has fixed he engine so it'll run over'
the skunks, ef it doesn't run up hill.'

'It can be made to do that, I think,' laughed young Brainerd.

'Afore we stay hyar, I'll take a look round to make sure that thar's
some show for us.'

The trapper ascended the bank, and, while his companions were occupied
in their preparations for encamping, he examined the whole horizon and
intervening space, so far as the human eye was capable of doing it.
Finding nothing suspicious, he announced to his companions that they
would remain where they were until morning.



                 CHAPTER XIX. THE DOINGS OF A NIGHT.

IT WAS soon found that the camping ground possessed another advantage
which, during the discussion, had been altogether overlooked.

During the afternoon they had shot a fine-looking antelope, cooking a
portion at the time upon the prairie. A goodly portion was left, and
they now had an opportunity of kindling their fire without the
liability of its being seen, as would have been the case had they
encamped in any other place.

This being agreed to, the fire was speedily kindled, and the trapper
himself began the culinary performance. It was executed with the
characteristic excellence of the hunter, and a luscious meal was thus
provided for all. At its conclusion, all stretched themselves upon the
ground for the purpose of smoking and chatting, as was their usual
custom at such times.

The evening whiled pleasantly away, and when it had considerably
advanced, the question of who should act as sentinel was discussed. Up
to this, young Brainerd had never once performed that duty at night,
although he had frequently solicited the privilege. He now-asked
permission to try his hand. After considerable talk it was agreed that
he might do. The trapper had lost so much sleep, that he was anxious
to secure a good night's rest, and the careful scrutiny which he had
taken of the surrounding prairie convinced him that no danger
threatened. So he felt little apprehension in acceding to the wish of
the boy.

At a late hour the two men stretched themselves upon the ground, with
their blankets gathered about them, and they were soon wrapped in
profound slumber, while Johnny, filled with the importance and
responsibility of his duty, felt as though he should never need
another hour's sleep. He was sure of being able to keep up an
unintermitting watch several days and nights, should it become
necessary.

Following the usual custom of sentinels, he shouldered his gun and
paced back and forth before the smoldering camp-fire, glancing in
every direction, so as to make sure that no enemy stole upon him
unawares.

It formed a curious picture, the small fire burning in the
valley, motionless forms stretched out before it, the huge steam man
silent and grim standing near, the dwarfed boy, pacing slowly back and
forth, and, above all, the moon shining down upon the silent prairie.
The moon was quite faint, so that only an indistinct view of objects
could be seen. Occasionally Johnny clambered up the bank and took a
survey of the surrounding plains; bat seeing nothing at all
suspicious, he soon grew weary of this, and confined his walks to the
immediate vicinity of the camp-fire, passing back and forth between
the narrow breadth of the valley.

As the hours dragged slowly by, the boy gradually fell into a reverie,
which made him almost unconscious of external things. And it was while
walking thus that he did not observe a large wolf advance to the edge
of the gully, look down, and then whisk back out of sight before the
sentinel wheeled in his walk and faced him.

Three separate times was this repeated, the wolf looking down in such
an earnest, searching way that it certainly would have excited the
remark and curiosity of any one observing it. The third glance
apparently satisfied the wolf; for it lasted for a few seconds, when
he withdrew, and lumbered away at an awkward rate, until a rod or two
had been passed, when the supposed wolf suddenly rose on its hind
legs, the skin and head were shifted to the arms of the Indian, and he
continued on at a leisurely gait until he joined fully fifty comrades,
who were huddled together in a grove, several hundred yards away.

In the meantime young Brainerd, with his rifle slung over his
shoulder, was pacing back and forth in the same deliberate manner, his
mind busily engaged on an 'improvement' upon the steam man, by which
he was to walk backward as well as forward, although he couldn't
satisfactorily determine how he was to go up and down hill with
safety.

Still occupied in the study of the subject, he took a seat by the
half-extinguished camp-fire and gazed dreamily into the embers. It had
been a habit with him, when at home, to sit thus for hours, on the
long winter evenings, while his mind was so busily at work that he was
totally oblivious to whatever was passing around him.

It must have been that the boy seated himself without any thought of
the inevitable result of doing so; for none knew better than he that
such a thing was fatal to the faithful performance of a sentinel's
duty: and the thought that his three companions, in one sense, had put
their safety in his hands, would have prevented anything like a
forgetfulness of duty.

Be that as it may, the boy had sat thus less than half an hour when a
drowsiness began stealing over him. Once he raised his head and
fancied he saw a large wolf glaring down upon him from the bank above,
but the head was withdrawn so quickly that he was sure it was only a
phantom of his brain.

So he did not rise from his seat, but sitting still he gradually sunk
lower, until in a short time he was sleeping as soundly as either of
the three around him.

Another hour wore away, and the fire smoldered lower and all was
still.

Then numerous heads peered over the edge of the ravine for a few
seconds, and as suddenly withdrew.

A few minutes later a curious sight might have been seen, a sight
somewhat resembling that of a parcel of school-boys making their
gigantic snow-balls. The fifty Indians, the greater portion of whom
had patiently waited in the adjoining grove, while their horses were
securely fastened near, issued like a swarm of locusts and began
rolling huge bowlders toward the valley. Some of them were so large
that half a dozen only succeeded in moving them with the greatest
difficulty.

But they persevered, working with a strange persistency and silence,
that gave them the appearance of so many phantoms engaged at their
ghostly labor. Not a word was exchanged, even in the most guarded of
tones, for each understood his part.

In time half a dozen of these immense stones reached the edge of the
ravine. They were ranged side by side, a few feet apart, so as not to
be in each other's way, and the Indians stood near, waiting until
their work should be completed.

Some signal was then made, and then one of these bowlders rolled down
in the ravine. Even this scarcely made any perceptible noise, the
yielding ground receiving it like a cushion, as it came to a halt near
the center of the valley.

When this was done a second followed suit, being so guided that it did
not grate against its companion, but came to rest very near it.

Then another followed, and then another and another, in the same
stealthy manner, until over a dozen were in the valley below.

This completed, the phantom-like figures descended like so many
shadows, and began tugging again at the bowlders.

Not a word was exchanged, for each knew what was required of him.
Fully an hour more was occupied, by which time the labor was finished.

The bowlders were arranged in the form of an impassable wall across
the narrow valley, and the steam man was so thoroughly imprisoned that
no human aid could ever extricate him.



               CHAPTER XX. THE CONCLUDING CATASTROPHE.

BALDY BICKNELL, the trapper, was the first to discover the peril of
himself and party.

When the Indians had completed their work it lacked only an hour of
daylight. Having done all that was necessary, the savages took their
stations behind the wall, lying flat upon the ground, where they were
invisible to the whites, but where every motion of theirs could be
watched and checkmated.

When the trapper opened his eyes he did not stir a limb, a way into
which he had got during his long experience on the frontiers. He
merely moved his head from side to side, so as to see anything that
was to be seen.

The first object that met his eye was the boy Brainerd, sound asleep.
Apprehensive then that something had occurred, he turned his startled
gaze in different directions, scanning everything as well as it could
be done in the pale moonlight.

When he caught sight of the wall stretched across the valley, he
rubbed his eyes, and looked at it again and again, scarcely able to
credit his senses. He was sure it was not there a few hours before,
and he could not comprehend what it could mean; but it was a verity,
and his experience told him that it could be the work of no one except
the Indians, who had outwitted him at last.

His first feeling was that of indignation toward the boy who had
permitted this to take place while he was asleep, but his mind quickly
turned upon the more important matter of meeting the peril, which,
beyond all doubt, was of the most serious character.

As yet he had not stirred his body, and looking toward the prison
wall, he caught a glimpse of the phantom-like figures, as they
occasionally flitted about, securing the best possible position,
before the whites should awake.

This glimpse made everything plain to the practical mind of Baldy
Bicknell. He comprehended that the red-skins had laid a plan to entrap
the steam man.  More than to entrap themselves, and that, so far as he
could judge, they had succeeded completely.

It was the tightest fix in which he had ever been caught, and his
mind, fertile as it was in expedients at such crises, could see no way
of meeting the danger.

He knew the Indians had horses somewhere at command, while neither he
nor his comrades had a single one. The steam man would be unable to
pass that formidable wall, as it was not to be supposed that he had
been taught the art of leaping.

Whatever plan of escape was determined upon, it was evident that the
steamer would have to be abandoned; and this necessitated, as an
inevitable consequence, that the whites would have to depend upon
their legs. The Missouri river was at no great distance, and if left
undisturbed they could make it without difficulty, but there was a
prospect of anything sooner than that they would be allowed to depart
in peace, after leaving the steam man behind.

The trapper, as had been his invariable custom, had carefully noted
the contour of the surrounding prairie, before they had committed the
important act of encamping in the gorge or hollow. He remembered the
grove at some distance, and was satisfied that the barbarians had left
their horses there, while they had gathered behind the wall to wait
the critical moment.

By the time these thoughts had fairly taken shape in his brain it was
beginning to grow light, and with a premonitary yawn and kick he rose
to his feet and began stirring the fire. He was well aware that
although he and his companions were a fair target for the rifles of
their enemies, yet they would not fire. Their plan of action did not
comprehend that, though it would have settled everything in their
favor without delay.

'I declare I have been asleep!' exclaimed Brainerd, as he began
rubbing his eyes.

'Yes. You're a purty feller to make a sentinel of, ain't you?' replied
the trapper, in disgust.

'I hope nothing has happened.' answered Johnny, feeling that he
deserved all the blame that could be laid upon him.

'Not much, exceptin' while yer war snoozin' the reds have come down
and got us all in a nice box.'

The boy was certain he was jesting until he saw the expression of his
face.

'Surely, Baldy, it is not as bad as that?'

'Do you see that ar?' demanded the trapper, pointing toward the wall,
which the youngster could not help observing.

'How comes that to be there?'

'The red-skins put it thar. Can yer steam man walk over that?'

'Certainly not; but we can remove them.'

'Do yer want to try it, younker?'

'I'm willing to help.'

'Do yer know that ar' somethin' less nor a hundred red-skins ahind
them, jist waitin' fur yer to try that thing?'

'Good heavens! can it be possible?'

'Ef you don't b'l'eve it, go out and look for yerself, that's all.'

The boy, for the first time, comprehends the peril in which he had
brought his friends by his own remissness, and his self-accusation was
so great, that, for a few moments, he forgot the fact that he was
exposed to the greatest danger of his life.

By this time Ethan and Mickey awoke, and were soon made to understand
their predicament. As a matter of course, they were all disposed to
blame the author of this; but when they saw how deeply he felt his own
shortcoming, all three felt a natural sympathy for him.

'There's no use of talkin' how we came to get hyar,' was the
philosophical remark of the trapper; 'it's 'nongh to know that we are
hyar, with a mighty slim chance of ever gettin' out ag'in.'

'It's enough to make a chap feel down in the mouth, as me friend Jonah
observed when he went down the throat of the whale,' said Mickey.

'How is it they don't shoot us?' asked Hopkins; 'we can't git out of
their way, and they've got us in fair range.'

'What's the use of doin' that? Ef they kill us, that'll be the end
on't; but ef they put thar claws on us, they've got us sure, and can
have a good time toastin' us while they yelp and dance around.'

All shuddered at the fearful picture drawn by the hunter.

'Jerusalem! don't I wish I was to hum in Connecticut!'

'And it's myself that would be plaised to be sitting in the parlor at
Ballyduff wid me own Bridget Moghlaghigbogh, listenin' while she
breathed swate vows, after making her supper upon praties and inions.'

'I think I'd ruther be hyar,' was the commentary of the trapper upon
the expressed wish of the Irishman.

'Why can't yees touch up the staammau, and make him hop owver them
shtones?' asked Mickey, turning toward the boy, whom, it was noted,
appeared to be in deep reverie again.

Not until he was addressed several times did he look up. Then he
merely shook his head, to signify that the thing was impossible.

'Any fool might know better than that.' remarked the Yankee, 'for if
he could jump over, where would be the wagon?'

'That 'ud foller, av coorse.'

'No; there's no way of getting the steam man out of here. He is a gone
case, sure, and it looks as though we were ditto. Jerusalem! I wish
all the gold was back in Wolf Ravine, and we war a thousand miles from
this place.'

'Wishing'll do no good; there's only one chance I see, and that ain't
no chance at all.'

All, including the boy, eagerly looked up to hear the explanation.

'Some distance from hyar is some timbers, and in thar the reds have
left their animals. Ef we start on a run for the timbers, git thar
ahead of the Ingins, mount thar hosses and put, thar'll be some
chance. Yer can see what chance thar is fur that.'

It looked as hopeless as the charge of the Light Brigade.

Young Brainerd now spoke.

'It was I who got you into trouble, and it is I, that, with the
blessing of Heaven, am going to get you out of it.'

The three now looked eagerly at him.

'Is there no danger of the Indians firing upon us?' he asked of the
hunter.

'Not unless we try to run away.'

'All right; it is time to begin.'

The boy's first proceeding was to kindle a fire in the boiler of the
steam man. When it was fairly blazing, he continued to heap in wood,
until a fervent heat was produced such as it had never experienced
before. Still he threw in wood, and kept the water low in the boiler,
until there was a most prodigious pressure of steam, making its escape
at half a dozen orifices.

When all the wood was thrown in that it could contain, and portions of
the iron sheeting could be seen becoming red-hot, he ceased this, and
began trying the steam.

'How much can he hold?' inquired Hopkins.

'One hundred and fifty pounds.'

'How much is on now?'

'One hundred and forty-eight, and rising.'

'Good heavens! it will blow up!' was the exclamation, as the three
shrunk back, appalled at the danger.

'Not for a few minutes; have you the gold secured, and the guns, so as
to be ready to run?'

They were ready to run at any moment; the gold was always secured
about their persons and it required but a moment to snatch up the
weapons.

'When it blows up, run!' was the admonition of the boy.

The steam man was turned directly toward the wall, and a full head of
steam let on. It started away with a bound, instantly reaching a speed
of forty miles an hour.

The next moment it struck the bowlders with a terrific crash, shot on
over its face, leaving the splintered wagon behind, and at the instant
of touching ground upon the opposite side directly among the
thunderstruck Indians, it exploded its boiler!

The shock of the explosion was terrible. It was like the bursting of
an immense bomb-shell, the steam man being blown into thousands of
fragments, that scattered death and destruction in every direction.
Falling in the very center of the crouching Indians, it could but make
a terrible destruction of life, while those who escaped unharmed, were
beside themselves with consternation.

This was the very thing upon which young Brainerd had counted, and for
which he made his calculations. When he saw it leap toward the wall in
such a furious manner, he knew the inevitable consequence, and gave
the word to his friends to take to their legs.

All three dashed up the bank, and reaching the surface of the prairie,
Baldy Bicknell took the lead, exclaiming:

'Now fur the wood yonder!'

As they reached the grove, one or two of the number glanced back, but
saw nothing of the pursuing Indians. They had not yet recovered from
their terror.

Not a moment was to be lost. The experienced eye of the trapper lost
no time in selecting the very best Indian horses, and a moment later
all four rode out from the grove at a full gallop, and headed toward
the Missouri.

The precise result of the steam man's explosion was never learned. How
many wore killed and wounded could only be conjectured; but the number
certainly was so great that our friends saw nothing more of them.

They evidently had among their number those who had become pretty well
acquainted with the steam man, else they would not have laid the plan
which they did for capturing him.

Being well mounted, the party made the entire journey to Independence
on horseback. From this point they took passage to St. Louis, where
the gold was divided, and the party separated, and since then have
seen nothing of each other.

Mickey McSquizzle returned to Ballyduff Kings County, Ireland, where,
we heard, he and his gentle Bridget, are in the full enjoyment of the
three thousand pounds he carried with him.

Ethan Hopkins settled down with the girl of his choice in Connecticut,
where, at last accounts, he was doing as well as could be expected.

Baldy Bicknell, although quite a wealthy man, still clings to his
wandering habits, and spends the greater portion of his time on the
prairies.

With the large amount of money realized from his western trip, Johnny
Brainerd is educating himself at one of the best schools in the
country. When he shall have completed his course, it is his intention
to construct another steam man, capable of more wonderful performances
than the first.

So let our readers and the public generally be on the lookout.



THE END.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Huge Hunter, by Edward S. Ellis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUGE HUNTER ***

***** This file should be named 7506.txt or 7506.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/7/5/0/7506/

Produced by Blackmask Online.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
