The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jack North's Treasure Hunt, by Roy Rockwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Jack North's Treasure Hunt
       Daring Adventures in South America

Author: Roy Rockwood

Posting Date: August 29, 2012 [EBook #7847]
Release Date: April, 2005
First Posted: May 22, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK NORTH'S TREASURE HUNT ***




Produced by Curtis A. Weyant and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team











[Illustration: DOWN THEY PLUNGED SIDE BY SIDE FROM THE ISLAND AND INTO THE
WATER.]




JACK NORTH'S TREASURE HUNT

Or,

Daring Adventures in South America
BY
ROY ROCKWOOD

Author of "The Rival Ocean Divers," "The Cruise of the
Treasure Ship," "A Schoolboy's Pluck," etc.

_Illustrated_

THE WORLD SYNDICATE PUBLISHING CO.
CLEVELAND   NEW YORK

Made in U.S.A.


Copyright, 1907, by
CHATTERTON-PECK COMPANY
PRESS OF
THE COMMERCIAL BOOKBINDING CO
CLEVELAND





Contents




     I.  A Chance for a Position
    II.  The Test of Strength
   III.  A Long Trip Proposed
    IV.  Just in Time
     V.  On the Island of Robinson Crusoe
    VI.  A Terrible Mistake
   VII.  A Plea of the Enemy
  VIII.  The Lonely Pimento
    IX.  Jack Becomes an Engineer
     X.  A Narrow Escape
    XI.  Under the Head of a Jaguar
   XII.  Put to the Test
  XIII.  Precious Moments
   XIV.  The Attack on the Train
    XV.  The Treasure Island
   XVI.  At the Boiling Lake
  XVII.  In the Nitrate Fields
 XVIII.  An Alarm of Fire
   XIX.  Chilians on Both Sides
    XX.  Preparations for Departure
   XXI.  A Panic on Shipboard
  XXII.  The Fate of Plum Plucky
 XXIII.  Jenny
  XXIV.  Jack and the Ocelot
   XXV.  In the Quicksands
  XXVI.  A Night in the Jungle
 XXVII.  Jack and the Big Snake
XXVIII.  Back from the Dead
  XXIX.  The Treasure of the Boiling Lake
   XXX.  A Ride for Life--Conclusion




Jack North's Treasure Hunt




Chapter I

A Chance for a Position



"Where are you going, Jack?"

"To the shops of John Fowler & Company."

"To look for a job?"

"Yes."

"Then you are in luck, for I heard this morning that they want another
striker in the lower shop at once."

"Then I'll _strike_ for the opening at once, and my name is not Jack
North if I don't land it."

"It will be John Slowshanks when you do get it, mind me!" cried out
another voice, from an alley-way near at hand, and before Jack North or
his companion could recover from their surprise the speaker, a tall,
awkward youth of twenty, sped up the street at the top of his speed.

The scene was in Bauton, a large manufacturing city of New England. The
first speaker was a workman at the shops that had been mentioned, but
beyond the fact that he placed the youth before him in the way of getting
work, he needs no special introduction.

The other person was a lad of eighteen, with brown, curly hair, blue eyes,
and a round, robust figure. His name was John North, and he was the son of
a couple in humble circumstances.

"Take care!" cried the man, "that sneak will get in ahead of you, and then
a snap of your little finger for your chance of getting the job at
Fowler's."

Jack North did not stop to hear his friend through. He was very much in
need of a situation, and he knew the young man who had rushed in ahead of
him as a bitter enemy. That fact, coupled with his desire to get work,
caused him to dash up the street as fast as he could run.

Naturally the appearance of the two running at such a headlong pace
aroused the attention of the passers-by, all of whom stopped to see what
it meant. Others rushed out of their houses, offices or workshops to
ascertain the meaning of the race, until the street was lined with
excited, anxious men, women and children.

"Is it fire?" asked an old, gray-headed man, and another, catching only
the sound of the last word, repeated it and thus a wild alarm was quickly
spread.

Meanwhile Jack North had found that he could not overtake his rival. He
was not a fleet runner, while the other had gotten a start of him, which
he could not hope to make up.

But he was too fertile in his resources to despair. In fact he was never
known to give up a contest which he had once fairly entered. This
persistence in whatever he undertook was the secret of Jack North's
wonderful success amid environments which must have discouraged less
courageous hearts.

Still it looked to his enemy, as the latter glanced back to see him
leisurely turn into a side street leading away from their destination,
that he had nothing further to fear from him.

"Thought you would be glad to give in," cried out the delighted seeker of
the situation at the engine shops, and believing that he had nothing
further to fear, the awkward youth slackened his gait to a walk.

Though Jack turned into the alley at a moderate pace, as soon as he had
gone a short distance, he started again into a smart run.

"I shall have farther to go," he thought, "but Fret Offut will think I
have given up, and thus he will let me get in ahead of him."

This seemed the truth, when, at last, Jack came in sight of the low-walled
and scattering buildings belonging to John Fowler & Co., engine builders.

Fret Offut was nowhere in sight, as Jack entered the dark, dingy office at
the lower end of the buildings.

A small sized man, with mutton chop side whiskers, engaged in overhauling
a pile of musty papers, looked up at the entrance of our hero.

"Want a job as striker, eh?" he asked, as Jack stated his errand. "I
believe Henshaw does want another man. I will call him. What is your
name?"

"Alfret Offut, sir. It's me that wants the job, and it's me it belongs
to."

It was Jack North's enemy who spoke, as he paused on the threshold panting
for breath, while glaring at our hero with a baleful look.

"How come you here?" he demanded of Jack, a second later.

"My feet brought me here, and with less slowness than yours, judging by
your appearance," replied young North.

With the arrival of the second person on the scene, the clerk had turned
away to find Henshaw, and while he was gone the rival youths stood glaring
upon each other.

After a short time a big, red-faced, soot-be-grimed man appeared, saying
as he reached them:

"If Offut will come this way I will talk with him."

"Henshaw," said the clerk simply, returning to his work, leaving the
newcomer to attend to the visitors as he thought best.

"Ha--ha!" laughed young Offut, softly, as he followed the foreman, "where
are you now, Jack North?"

Though Jack gave slight token of his feelings, he was more vexed at this
usurpation of his rights than he cared to show. He lost no time in
starting after the others in the direction of the shop. "I'm going on
twenty-one," Offut said, as they stopped at the door, "and there ain't a
chap as can outlift me."

"Beg your pardon, Mr. Henshaw," said Jack, brushing up, "but it's I who am
after the job and to whom it belongs. Mr. Jacobs--"

"Is your name Alfret Offut?" interrupted the other youth sharply in the
midst of Jack's speech. "I reckon Henshaw knows who he is talking to." "It
was me Mr. Jacobs recommended the place to, and you are trying to steal it
from me," cried Jack. "You are telling a likely story, Jack North, and if
you say another word I'll hit you. Henshaw called for me, and it's me he's
going to give work."

Mr. Henshaw, who for the first time seemed to realize the situation,
looked surprised, as he gazed from one to the other.

Disliking to raise a fuss Jack remained silent at first, but he felt bound
to say:

"I was first at the office, and I claim--" "You'd claim the earth, as far
as that is concerned, you miserable chick of nobody!" broke in Offut.

The last was more than Jack could stand, and stepping quickly forward, he
cried: "Stop, Fret Offut! you have said enough. I don't want any quarrel
with you, but I am as good as you."

"Are yer?" demanded the fiery Offut, whose greatest delight seemed to be
in provoking a quarrel. "I can lick you out of your boots, and I will do
it before I will let you get in here." By this time Mr. Henshaw, a rather
rough man, as slow as he was of comprehension, was interested in the
dispute, and not averse to encouraging sport of the kind, he said:

"That's it, boys; fight it out. I'll hire the lad that downs the other."

"Then the job is as good as mine!" cried Fret Offut, rushing at Jack with
great bluster and no regard to fairness.




Chapter II

The Test of Strength



If taken unawares, Jack North did not allow his enemy to get very much the
advantage of him. As the other rushed forward, expecting to overpower him
by sheer force, he met him squarely in a hand-to-hand struggle for the
mastery.

Mr. Henshaw seemed delighted, and he cried out:

"Limber up, lads, limber up! A job to him that comes out on top! Hi,
there!"

Sundry other exclamations came from the excited foreman at every change of
the situation, while several spectators, attracted to the place by the
out-cries, gathered about the young contestants, lending their voices to
the confusing sounds of the scene.

While Fret Offut was taller and larger than Jack North, he lacked the
latter's firm-set muscles, and what was of even greater account, his
unflinching determination to win. Our hero never knew what it was to
possess a faint heart, and that is more than half the battle every time.

Thus when young Offut crowded him back against the wall of the building,
and every one present felt sure he must be overpowered, Jack set his lips
more firmly together and renewed his resistance with redoubled effort.

Then, as he struck his foot against a piece of scrap iron and reeled
backward in spite of all he could, his friends groaned, while Fret Offut
cried, exultantly:

"Ho, my fine cub, down you go this time! Henshaw--"

But Mr. Henshaw never knew what was to be said to him, neither did the
young bully ever realize fully just what followed.

Jack, concentrating all the strength he possessed, rallied. He threw out
his right foot in such a way as to catch his antagonist behind his left
knee, when the latter suddenly found himself sinking. At the same time the
grasp on his collar tightened, while with almost superhuman power he was
flung backward. With such force did Jack handle his adversary that he sent
him flying several yards away, where he fell in a pool of dark, slimy
water.

The spectators cheered heartily, while Mr. Henshaw clapped his grimy hands
and shouted at the top of his voice:

"Well done, my hearty! That's a handsome trick and well worth a job."

Fret Offut arose from his unwelcome bath, dripping from head to foot with
the nasty mess, presenting a most unprepossessing appearance.

The foreman was turning back into the shop, followed by Jack, and the
crowd was rapidly dispersing.

"Hold on!" he bawled, "that wasn't fair. I tripped--stop, Henshaw! don't
let my job go to that miserable thief."

Getting no reply to his foolish speech, Offut followed the others into the
shop. His appearance being so ridiculous he was greeted with cries of
derision from the workmen, which only made him the more angry and
belligerent.

"I'll get even with you for this, Jack North!" he cried, "if I follow you
to the end! My father always said your family was the meanest on earth,
and now I know it is so. But you shall hear from me again."

With these bitter words the defeated youth, who really had no one to blame
but himself for his ill-feeling, disappeared, though it was not to be long
before he was to reappear in the stirring life of Jack North, and bring
him such troubles as he could not have foreseen.

It proved that Mr. Henshaw was anxious for another workman, and after
asking Jack a few questions, told the lad he might begin his task at once.

The pay was small, less than five dollars a week, but Jack did not let
that cause him to refuse the opportunity. He needed the money, for his
folks were in poor circumstances, and he went about his work with a stout
heart.

He quickly proved an adept workman, observing, rapid to learn and always
diligent, so much so that the foreman took a strong liking to him.

Several days passed and it became evident to Jack that if he had left one
enemy outside the shop, he had another within, who was ready to improve
every opportunity to trouble him. This was a small, thinfaced man who
worked with him, and whose name was Mires. Besides being physically unable
to carry an even end with him, this workman was prone to shirk every part
of his work that he could, this portion falling largely on Jack to do in
addition to his own.

Jack paid no heed to this, however, but kept about his work as if
everything was all right, until a little incident occurred which
completely changed the aspect of affairs.

Unknown to our hero, there had been a practice of long standing among the
workmen of "testing" every new hand that came in, by playing what was
believed to be a smart trick upon him. The joke consisted in sending the
new hand in company with a fellow workman to bring from a distant part of
the shop a pair of wheels, one of which was of iron and weighed over four
hundred pounds, while its mate was made of wood and finished off to look
exactly like its companion. The workman in the secret always looked out
and got hold of the wooden wheel, which he could carry off with ease,
while his duped associate would struggle over the other to the unbounded
amusement of the lookers-on.

It heightened the effect by selecting a small, weak man to help in the
deception, and Henshaw, liking this joke no less than his men, on the
third day of Jack's apprenticeship, said:

"North, you and Mires bring along them wheels at the lower end. Don't be
all day about it either," speaking with unusual sharpness.

"Yes, sir."

In a moment every one present was watching the scene, beginning to smile
as they saw Mires start with suspicious alacrity toward the wheels. Some
of the men, in order to get as good a view as possible of the expected
exhibition, stationed themselves near at hand, having hard work to
suppress their merriment in advance.

"Purty stout, air ye?" asked Mires, as he and Jack stood by the wheels.

"I never boasted of my strength," replied Jack, beginning to wonder why so
much interest was being manifested over so slight a matter. His surprise
was increased at that moment by discovering Fret Offut among the
spectators, his big mouth reaching almost from ear to ear with an idiotic
grin.

"Come to see the fun!" declared the latter, finding that he had been seen
by Jack.

"I'll take this one," said Mires, stooping over the nearest wheel which
was half buried in dust and dirt.

Then, without any apparent effort, the small sized workman raised the
wheel to his shoulder and walked back from the direction whence they had
come.

"Now see the big gawk lift his!" exclaimed Fret Offut, who had somehow
been let into the secret. Still ignorant of the deception being played
upon him, Jack North bent over to lift the remaining wheel.




Chapter III

A Long Trip Proposed



Having seen Mires carry off the other wheel with comparative ease, Jack
naturally expected to lift the remaining one without trouble.

His amazement may be therefore understood when, at his first effort, he
failed to move it an inch from the floor.

It lay there as solid as if bound down!

His failure was the signal for Fret Offut to break out into a loud laugh,
which was instantly caught up by the workmen, until the whole building
rang with the merriment.

"Baby!" some one cried. "See Mires carry his. North ain't got the strength
of a mouse!"

By that time Mires had reached the opposite end of the shop, and was
putting down his burden to turn and join in the outbursts over the
discomfiture of his young companion.

Jack had now awakened to the realization that he had been the easy victim
of a scheme to cast ridicule upon him.

Mires could never have carried away this wheel. The thought of the trick
which had been played upon him aroused all the latent energy he possessed.
He did not believe the wheel could weigh five hundred pounds, and if it
did not he would lift it, as he believed he could.

Thus, with the shouts and laughter of the spectators ringing in his ears,
Jack stooped for a second attempt to accomplish what no one else had ever
been able to do.

"I'll grunt for you!" called Offut in derision. "Spit on your hands!" said
a workman. Jack compressed his lips for a mighty effort, and his hands
closed on the rim of the wheel, while he concentrated every atom of
strength he had for the herculean task.

The cries of the onlookers suddenly stopped as they saw, to their
amazement, the ponderous object rise from the floor, slowly but surely,
until the young workman held it abreast of him. Not a sound broke the
deathlike stillness, save for the crunching of his own footsteps, as Jack
North walked across the shop and dropped his burden upon the wheel Mires
had placed there.

A loud crash succeeded, the heavy iron wheel having broken the imitation
into kindling wood and smashed into the floor.

The cries of derision were supplemented by loud calls of admiration, which
rang through and through the old building until a perfect din prevailed.

Fret Offut waited to see no more, but stole away unobserved by the
stalwart iron workers, who crowded around their victorious companion with
hearty congratulations. Jack had won the friendship of nearly all by his
feat, while Henshaw at once boasted of the act.

Mires, fancying that the laugh had been turned upon him, and he was about
right, allowed all of the bitterness of his sullen nature to be turned
against the young apprentice. In his wicked heart he vowed he would
humiliate Jack in the eyes of his admirers in some way and at some time.
But no opportunity came for him, as month after month passed.

Jack showed a wonderfully industrious nature, and he never seemed idle.
When not at work he was studying some part of the ponderous machinery
about him, as if anxious to learn all there was to be known about it. The
knowledge he thus obtained was to be of inestimable value to him in the
scenes to come.

This trait of his pleased Henshaw, who, if a rough man, was honest in his
intentions, and he caused Jack's wages to be raised to seven dollars a
week. This was done in opposition to his assistant, who had taken a
strange dislike to him. His reasons for this will become apparent as we
proceed. About that time Jack was surprised to find that Fret Offut had
found employment in the building, though it was more as a helper than as a
regular workman, his chief task being to wheel the scraps of iron and
waste material away and to wait upon the boss of the big steam hammer.

He did not offer to speak to Jack, but the latter soon saw him holding
whispered conversations with Mires and the second boss, Furniss, when he
felt certain by their looks and motions that he was the subject of their
remarks. Once he overheard Offut tell a companion:

"I sha'n't wheel scrap iron always and Jack North won't be boss, either."

Jack had been at the engine works about six months, when he accidentally
learned that the company were planning to ship one of their machines to
South America, and that they were looking about for a suitable person to
send with it, to help unload it properly and set it up. A few days later,
as he was leaving the shop to go home, Henshaw came to him, saying:

"Let me put a flea in your ear, Jack. John Fowler has got his eye on you
for the one to go to South America."

Scarcely any other announcement could have brought greater joy to Jack,
for he had a great desire to travel, and this long journey would take him
away from home for many months, he felt it would be a grand opportunity.
But he knew that Furniss had been working for the place, and he could not
realize that such good fortune was to fall to him, so he said to Henshaw:

"I thought that Furniss was sure of the chance. I heard him say as much
only yesterday." "A fig for Furniss! Old John had a long talk with me this
morning, and I told him you were just the chap for the place, young and
capable. He nodded his head and I could see that you were as good as
taken. Of course we shall miss you, but it's a trip a youngster like you
can't afford to miss."

"I should like to go, Mr. Henshaw, and I thank you for your kind words."

"Don't cost nothing," returned the bluff foreman, as he started homeward.

Jack was too happy over his prospects to mind the baleful looks of Furniss
the next day, or to hear the jibes of Fret Offut. Could he have foreseen
the startling result he must have been bound with dismay.

The following Monday, when the day's work was done and he was leaving the
shop, Mr. Henshaw came along, and slapping him on the shoulder, said: "Let
me congratulate you, my lad. It is just as I said; you are going to South
America,--if you will."

"It seems too good to be true, Mr. Henshaw." "It's the blessed truth and I
know it I don't blame you for feeling well over such an appointment, for
it is something any of us might be glad of. But you deserve it."

The appearance of Furniss checked Jack's reply. He could see the other
understood that he had lost. He had another proof of the fact before he
got home from Fret Offut, who said:

"Feel mighty stuck up, don't yer? But let me tell yer,'twon't do any
good."

This was the first time he had spoken to Jack since he had begun work in
the shops, and our hero made no reply.

The following day, as he was about to leave the shop at the close of his
work, Jack was accosted by Furniss, who asked him to assist him a moment
at the big hammer.

Jack started at once to his help, noticing that the building was
completely deserted at the time, except for the second boss and himself;
even Henshaw, who generally stayed until after the workmen had left, was
gone.

His surprise may be imagined then when he saw Fret Offut step from behind
a huge boiler as he approached. Still he did not dream of any sinister
purpose in the minds of the two, and he was about to stoop to lift a piece
of iron at the request of Furniss, when he discovered a bar of iron so
suspended over his head from the cross timber that a slight movement on
his part was sure to bring it down upon his head.

No sooner had he seen his precarious situation than he started back, when
Fret Offut flung a heavy slug at his feet. The effect was startling, for
the concussion on the floor sent the menacing bar overhead downward with
fearful force.

Jack succeeded in dodging the blow so far that he escaped the full weight
of the falling iron, which struck the floor endwise with a heavy thud. But
before he could get beyond its reach the massive bar tipped over, falling
in such way as to strike him in the side of the head, and felling him
senseless to the floor.

In a moment Furniss and Offut were bending over him with anxious looks on
their grimy countenances.

"Is he killed?" asked the younger of the twain.

Jack answered the question himself by opening his eyes, though he was
still too bewildered to attempt to rise.

"What did you do that for?" he demanded.

"Do what?" questioned Fret Offut. "You know well enough. You fixed that
bar so it would hit me."

"Hear the boy talk!" came from Furniss. "It is true. If I get the chance--"

"Stop, you shan't get us into trouble," yelled the man, in a rage.

"Not much," put in Offut. "Let's teach him a lesson he won't forget!"

"So we will," answered Furniss; and both started forward to attack Jack.




Chapter IV

Just in Time



Though still somewhat dazed by the blow on his head, Jack realized that
the unprincipled twain in their desperation would stop short of no crime
in order to carry out their purpose.

Thus Furniss had barely laid his hand on him before he was on his feet
ready to fight for his life if necessary.

Flinging aside the second boss, he turned to meet the assault of Fret
Offut, whom he caught by the collar and flung headlong upon a pile of
scrap iron and ashes still warm from the furnace.

Shrieking with pain the big youth scrambled to his feet and began to dance
around as if he had a coal of fire in the heel of his shoe.

Furniss rallied to grapple anew with Jack, but though a strong man he
found his match. Used to hard work all of his life, Jack's sinews seemed
like bands of steel and there was no breaking from his grasp.

"Help, Offut--quick!" cried Furniss, as his head was jabbed into the midst
of a box of coal. "He--he'll kill me!" spluttered the discomfited man.

But Fret Offut failed for good reasons to heed the supplications of his
friend.

The next instant Furniss managed to get a hold on Jack which enabled him
to throw him upon the floor.

"Go to South America, will you?" cried the exultant Furniss. "Let that
settle it," and he aimed a furious blow at his victim's head.

But Jack was too nimble to remain still and receive whatever attack the
other might rain upon him, and when Furniss' fist descended it missed its
mark, to strike plump upon the sharp edge of a bar of iron, peeling the
skin on its back from knuckle to wrist.

At the same time Jack turned his adversary and, clearing him, vaulted to
his feet, carrying the other backwards by the impetuous movement and
sending him headfirst into a bucket of water.

Before he could rise Jack had caught him by the throat with one hand, and
he immediately began to "churn" the other's head up and down in the black
water, while the discomfited wretch, trying in vain to break away,
exclaimed in gasps:

"Help--don't--you'll kill me! I--Of--ut--h-e-l-p--murder!"

"Will you promise to let me alone after this?" demanded Jack, giving his
victim another plunge in the bucket.

"Yes. Let me go or I'll tell Fowler. Oh--oh!"

"Tell Fowler, will you?"

"No--no! Let me go!"

"You promise it?"

"Yes," spluttered the man as soon as he could speak.

"I think that will be enough this time." declared the triumphant Jack. "If
I could get my hands on you, Fret Offut, I would give you a dose of the
same medicine."

"I ain't done nothing!" cried the terrified youth. "Don't you dare to
touch me!" and by that time he had reached the door, to disappear an
instant later.

Feeling that he had nothing more to fear from his enemies, Jack left the
shop to go to his home, his mind soon occupied with thoughts of his South
American voyage rather than with the more unpleasant memory of his recent
trouble with young Offut and Furniss.

Before going direct to his home to tell the news there, Jack sought
another home that he might first break the account of his good fortune to
one whose fair countenance had been in his mind's eye all the afternoon.

He knew the hardest part of his starting on his long voyage would be in
tearing himself away from a certain blue-eyed damsel named Jenny Moodhead.

At her home he was met by the girl's mother, who, in answer to his
inquiries for Jenny, said:

"Jane is not here, and I do not see why you have not met her, as she said
she was going to see you as you came from the shops. I am afraid something
has happened to her."

Without further loss of time, Jack started to retrace the way to the
engine shops, though going by a different course from that which he had
come.

He had got about half way there, and was passing near an old ruined mill,
which stood more than half over the river, when he was startled by the
sound of a voice, which was too familiar for him not to recognize.

"Don't you dare come any nearer, Fret Offut! Stand back, or the worst will
be your own!"

It was Jenny speaking, and as Jack dashed down to the side of the old mill
he discovered her at the further extremity of the ruins defiantly facing
young Offut, who was kept from approaching any nearer to her by a club she
held in her hands, uplifted over her head.

Between the two was a gulf of dark waters a dozen feet or more in width,
but spanned by a plank over which the girl had evidently passed in
reaching her place of retreat.

"I'll take up the plank so you can't come back!" declared young Offut.
"You see if you do not answer me in a becoming manner I can--"

Fret Offut did not have the opportunity to finish his sentence before a
stout hand was laid on his shoulder and he was plunged headfirst into the
river. "Get out the best you can!" cried Jack North.

He turned to the girl. "Has he dared so much as to lay a ringer on you,
Jenny?"

"Oh, Jack! I am so glad to see you! No, he had not touched me, though I
don't know what he might have done if you had not come. You won't let him
drown?"

"It would serve him about right, if I did. But he will take care of
himself. See, he is crawling out below the mill. Come with me, Jenny, for
I have important news to tell you. I am going to South America!"

"To South America! Oh, Jack, why?"

"The firm want me to go, and they will pay me well for my services. I am
to look after some machinery that is to be shipped."

"But you will come back?" questioned Jenny, anxiously.

"Sure, as soon as my task is done. But now tell me about Fret Offut."

"Oh, there is not much to tell. He--he wanted to be sweet on me and--and I
wouldn't have it. That made him angry, and he followed me to this place,
and--you saw the rest."

"I hope he won't bother you again."

"I don't think he will," said Jenny. "Anyway, I'll keep my eyes open for
him."

After that Jack spent a pleasant hour in the company of the girl who was
his dearest friend, and then went home to prepare for his trip of so many
thousand miles.

His parents already knew something about the proposed journey, so they
were not much surprised. They had seen Mr. Fowler and talked it over with
the manufacturer. Mrs. North did what she could to get Jack's outfit ready
for him.

"I'll be glad to leave such fellows as Fret Offut behind," said Jack, to
his father.

"Fret Offut is a bully and a fool," said Mr. North, who was a blunt-spoken
man. "He will never get along in life."

Jack had spoken without knowing the truth. He was not to get rid of Fret
Offut just yet, as we shall soon see.




Chapter V

On the Island of Robinson Crusoe



Ho! for South America!

Bravely did the good steamer _Standish_ keep on her long, and, at
times, stormy voyage to the far distant shore of Western South America.
She escaped the severest storms of the Northern Atlantic, Grossed the
equatorial line in fine shape, and stemmed the farious wrath of Cape Horn
in safety. But every one on board felt freer and in better spirits, when
at last they entered the Pacific regions where storms are of rare
occurrence.

The steamer's destination was Valparaiso, Chili, and the commander talked
of getting into port shortly.

Among those looking most hopefully forward to the termination of the
voyage was our hero, who had been sent by his employers on the responsible
errand of seeing that one of their engines was properly delivered and put
into good running order. He fondly believed it was the great opportunity
of his life.

He was never more surprised than he was upon finding at the last moment
that Fret Offut had been delegated to accompany him as helper.

At first he could not believe it; but there the awkward youth was, and
that he was sent for that purpose was plainly indicated by the order from
John Fowler & Co.

To his still greater surprise, the other seemed to have forgotten or
overlooked their differences, and he greeted Jack with all the warmth of
an old friend.

"If he can afford to be friendly I can," thought Jack, who was not a
person to cherish long any bitterness of feeling against another, and he
resolved to treat Fret as well as possible.

This, coupled with that bond of sympathy for an associate one is sure to
have on leaving those dear to him far behind, made the two seem somewhat
like friends.

Had Jack known the truth, known the frequent and long conversations his
deceitful companion had held with the plotting Furniss, and how the latter
had worked to get Offut sent on this voyage with him, our hero would have
felt different toward the other. The second boss's parting words had been:
"Remember you owe this opportunity to me, Fret Offut, who might have gone
but for my willingness to let you. Don't forget either that if, for any
reason, North does not get to Valparaiso you will step into his place, and
gain the honor he is anxious to get."

This was spoken with such signs and indications as only one in the secret
could understand, and young Offut nodded knowingly, as much as to say:

"I understand perfectly, and will not fail in my part to gain our ends."

It may have been that the looked-for opportunity did not come, as he had
expected, or that his courage failed him in his cowardly purpose, for no
harm befel Jack until on the evening before the day, which, if nothing
unfavorable occurred, the commander had promised would bring them within
sight of land. Jack stood by the quarter-rail a long time watching the sun
sink into the distant water, and then the silent coming of the stars into
the firmament overhead.

It was a beautiful evening, though fleecy clouds were beginning to fringe
the horizon, and he was certain the whole sky would be obscured soon.

But his mind was more engrossed with thoughts of his parents and Jenny at
home than with the calm grandeur of a tropical sea, and he was wondering
how many months must pass before he should be able to meet her, when the
sound of a cat-like step behind him arrested his attention.

Thinking of no harm, he turned slowly to greet the one approaching, to
find himself confronted by the tall figure of Fret Offut.

A look of wild fierceness was on the other's features, and before Jack
could speak his arms were uplifted, swinging overhead a belaying pin.

Reading at a glance Offut's horrible purpose, Jack attempted to seize his
upraised hands, but he had barely made a move before the weapon descended
upon him!

With an indistinct recollection of a dull sense of pain in his head, Jack
knew no more until he was brought back to consciousness by the feeling of
water around him and it slowly dawned upon him that he had been sent
overboard from the ship into the sea by the blow from Fret Offut.

It was too dark for him to see any distance, so he listened for some sound
of the steamer.

Once he thought he caught the regular swish, swish of the big wheel; but
he must have been mistaken, for after a moment he realized that the
_Standish_ was not within hearing.

He had begun to shout for help, and this shouting he kept up until he was
hoarse, and he felt that it would be better to save all of his strength in
the great battle for life ahead.

No one, who has not been there, can know the utter hoplessness of being
castaway upon the great, boundless ocean with not even a plank to keep him
from a watery grave.

Jack North was brave and sanguine, but for a time he felt that it was
useless for him to try and keep up. Then the thought of home and loved
ones, with all the bright dreams and hopes of life, gave him the
resolution to fight for victory over defeat until the very last. He had
heard of sailors who had been cast away, and who had managed to keep
afloat a whole night and day. Might not he keep from drowning until
morning?

At any rate he would not give up while he had the strength to struggle
against fate.

Buoyed up with hopes which he knew were groundless, he swam on and on
through the dark expanse of waters girdling him.

When he had gone as far as he deemed prudent he would turn upon his back
and thus float upon the bosom of the great deep, borne by its ceaseless
tide he knew not whither.

Perhaps he was being carried further and further out to sea, or it might
be he was slowly approaching the shore of the southern continent.

That was the longest, most gloomy night Jack North ever knew. He saw nor
heard nothing of the steamer during the long hours of darkness and
desolation.

With the first faint streak of daylight he scanned the surrounding sea
with anxious, eager gaze. But whither he would look, north, south, east or
west, not an object broke the monotony of the view.

He felt that he was hopelessly lost, and he wondered in his despair if his
true fate would be known.

As it grew lighter he continued to watch the sea for some welcome sight,
until he saw, away on his left, a dark rim on the horizon. Was it a cloud
or--land?

He dared not hope it was the latter at first, but as it grew plainer he
felt a thrill of joy pass through his worn-out frame.

"Land!" he cried, coming near drowning in the exuberance of his new-found
discovery.

Even after he had seen land it seemed he was doomed to disappointment.

It did not appear that he had strength to reach it. Still the prospect
ahead served to give power to his weary limbs and a new lease of endurance
to his overworked body.

As he swam nearer he saw that great pointed peaks pierced the sky wherever
he looked, while abrupt walls of rock rose from the water's edge to the
height of many hundred feet.

These he realized could not be scaled by him, and as he gazed on the gray,
moss-covered rocks dripping with the spray of the ocean that continually
beat against their rugged sides, hopelessness again came near overpowering
him.

Above the granite front of this lonely island, as he believed it to be, he
could see stupendous ridges of reddish earth rise in countless numbers and
always running back toward the centre, with here and there green pastures
of grass, but he looked in vain for a break in the adamantine barrier
which made this ocean-bound realm unapproachable.

In his despair he was nearly overjoyed to suddenly see a boat, with two
men in it, come around an angle of the rock-bound shore.

He shouted as loudly as he could in his exhausted state for help, and then
gave up the battle, and sank.

But strong arms were near, and the boatmen, hearing his cries, rowed
rapidly to his assistance and picked him up as he was going down for the
last time.

When Jack recovered consciousness he found himself lying on a rude couch,
with a friendly face looking into his and his hand held by the same
person.

"Well, here you are," said the man. "I had about given up looking for you
to come out of it. You must have had a long, hard pull against the sea."

"Where am I?" asked Jack. "Who are you?"

"You are on the island of Robinson Crusoe. As to myself, I am an American
by the name of William Pearce. Before I shall ask you even your name I
shall advise you to keep quiet and go to sleep if you can. You are among
friends."

Jack was fain to follow this well-meant advice, and a few minutes later he
was sound asleep.

It was nearly night before he awoke, and even then his friend would not
allow him to leave his couch.

"Here is a dish of goat's milk and I will soon have some warm oat
porridge."

Jack felt stronger when he had partaken of the simple food offered him,
but he was still too weak to move about very much, and in less than five
minutes he was again asleep.

He did not awake until the following morning this time, when he found
himself in pretty good condition.

His host being absent at the time, he had an opportunity to examine his
surroundings. He found himself in a small hut built of the straw of wild
oats, interwoven with long, slender sticks, while the roof was treated in
the same way. Only a few rather primitive utensils of cooking and living
were to be seen, and he was wondering what sort of a hermit he had fallen
in with when the man entered.

He was past middle life, with a sunburned, bearded and honest countenance.

Upon seeing that Jack had awakened, his looks instantly brightened and he
spoke cheerily:

"Glad to see you looking so well. You will be all right in a day or two."

"Is it possible that I am on the island where Robinson Crusoe spent his
lonely years?"

"It is so."

"I can hardly believe it."

"Nevertheless it is a fact."

"If I ever get away from it I will read the story all over again."

The man laughed.

"That's natural.

"But do you live here alone?"

"Oh, no; there are six Chilian families here with me. But you are beating
me at asking questions, for you have learned all there is to be learned of
me, while I cannot name you from any descendant of old Adam."

Without further delay Jack told his companion the story of his adventures.




Chapter VI

A Terrible Mistake



Jack found Robinson Crusoe's island a pleasanter place than he had
expected. Among the ridges were many pretty valleys which were covered
with patches of woods or grass. Everything bore a peculiar hue of green,
from the groves of myrtle, pimento and corkwood to the grassy plots, the
natural fields of oats and even to the moss-covered rocks of the spinelike
mountains.

The coast, as far as he could see, overhung the sea or rose perpendicular
to such a height as to make it inaccessible, except at one place where a
rent in the wall allowed man to enter the almost sacred domain.

The rude, picturesque huts of Mr. Pearce and his associates stood in a
romantic valley, where the American told him had stood the "castle" of the
Crusoe inhabitant of the island, Alexander Selkirk, whose strange story
has been read the wide world over.

Jack had been at the island nearly a week, and he was looking forward to
an opportunity to go to the mainland in a few days, when Mr. Pearce
informed him that something singular had transpired during the night.

"Though no vessel is in sight this morning, I am sure some one landed here
last night between midnight and daylight."

"Do you think there is anything to fear from such a visit, providing some
one has been here?" asked Jack.

"I don't know. This island was used several years as a penal colony for
Chili, but an earthquake so upset things that the one hundred and fifty
odd prisoners escaped, and since that no one has been sent here. But it
has been the refuge of two or three outlaws since, as if the place had a
strange fascination for them. Perhaps they think it is a safe place to
flee to after what has occurred here. I have had no trouble with them
worth mentioning."

"Do you think one came last night?"

"Looks like it. But I will find out before I am much older. I will get the
Chilians to go with us and we will explore the cells."

Jack was not kept in suspense long as to Mr. Pearce's meaning.

Upon reaching the foot of a bluff about half a mile from the ruins of what
looked like an old fort, but which was now embedded in banks of clay and
overgrown with moss and rank weeds, he found that the whole structure had
been built of stone.

"It was done by the Chilian government in 1767," said Mr. Pearce, "and was
undone by an earthquake in 1835. This you see here nearest was the front
wall of the main rampart. But here is the greatest wonder in the hillside.
This old building--fortress, as it might be truthfully called--was the
abode of the officers and their men who were stationed here to watch and
guard the island, while these other retreats which are marked by those
black mouths were used for an altogether different purpose."

Mr. Pearce pointed, as he spoke, to numerous dark openings in the side of
the hill, there being many completely hidden by the rank ferns hanging in
festoons at their entrance.

"It was in these pits, dug into the earth to the depth of two or three
hundred feet, that the Chilian government confined their convicts, and
where, if all reports be true, they underwent tortures that made life a
living death. The earthquake tore down all the heavy doors, as if the
elements were in league with the poor captives, every one of whom thus
managed to escape.

"It is in these places the fugitives who seek this island for safety
conceal themselves. We can find some sign at the mouth if any one has
entered a cell since yesterday."

He then led the way along the broken-down entrances of the underground
excavations, now occupied by bats, toads and vermin, but where once
miserable wrecks of manhood had found a terrible punishment for their
crimes.

A wild goat sprang out from one of the cells and bounded away, but no
trace of a human being was found, until at last Mr. Pearce stopped before
one cell which was reached by descending several stone steps.

"This was one of the cells for exceptionally bad prisoners," said Mr.
Pearce. "It is not as deep as some of the others, but reeks with a cold
sweat, and the air is so damp and chilly as to make one shiver the moment
he enters. Just think of the poor wretches confined here, where no ray of
sunlight could ever reach them, and no living soul to pity them in their
hopeless despair! This does not run into the earth more than twenty-five
feet. Your eyes are younger and sharper than mine; see if those are not
fresh footprints."

"They are," replied Jack, as soon as he had made a hasty examination; "and
I am sure they are made by an American shoe!"

"Whew!" exclaimed Mr. Pearce, "that makes it more mysterious, and it
behooves us to move with great caution. One of us had better remain on the
outside, while the other makes an exploration of the den. Which will you
do?"

"I will go inside, if it makes no difference to you, only I wish you would
let me have one of your pistols."

"Of course, and you can take this knife, too. Move cautiously, for if
there is an American run to earth in there, you may count on it that he
will fight for his life. It will be different from facing one of those
Chilians, who make a good deal of noise and but a little resistance."

Jack promised to act with caution, and taking the weapons tended him by
his companion, he boldly pushed his way down the rough stairway leading to
the dark dungeon.

"Give the signal at the least sign of danger, and I will be there in a
trice," were Mr. Pearce's parting words. "Meanwhile if you hear me
whistle, don't fail to come back as quickly as possible."

By this time Jack was at the foot of the descent, and parting the damp
ferns that overhung the mouth of the cell, he was about to enter the
dismal passage, when his foot struck something that rustled.

Reaching down in the darkness, his hand touched a sheet of paper or
parchment, which he picked up.

He had hardly done this before Mr. Pearce gave a shrill whistle, which
caused Jack to return to his side, wondering what had happened.

His surprise may be imagined when he saw a squad of armed men drawn up in
front of them!

"They are Government soldiers in search of the fugitive," whispered Mr.
Pearce. "Don't do anything rash if you value your life. Let me speak to
them."

A short consultation then followed in Spanish, the new-comers all the time
covering the twain with their cocked carbines.

Finally Mr. Pearce turned to Jack, saying: "It is just as I thought. They
are looking for an escaped prisoner-an Englishman, or rather youth, as
they tell me. They think you are the one and demand your immediate
surrender. The best thing you can do is to give up without resistance. I
will stand by you when the time comes for the need of my help. They won't
believe a word I say now. See they are getting impatient. What answer
shall I give them?"

Jack, who did not understand a word that they had said, realized from
their manner that he could expect no mercy from the Chilians. If Mr.
Pearce could not benefit him now, how could he later? Still his only
alternative seemed to be to surrender, upon the condition that he be given
fair treatment at the hands of the government.

But notwithstanding this stipulation, no sooner had he signified his
intention of yielding without resistance than he was roughly siezed and
bound. Then some of his captors dragged him back against the side of the
bluff. The leader gave a few words of command to his followers, who obeyed
by instantly bringing their firearms to their shoulders, pointed at Jack!

"Great sun!" exclaimed Mr. Pearce, his face turning white as marble as he
witnessed this summary threat, "they mean to shoot you on the spot!" He
had barely uttered these startling words before the leader of the squad
raised his right hand, as a signal for the marksmen to fire.




Chapter VII

A Plea of the Enemy



Jack realized that only a desperate effort could save him.

Mr. Pearce, whose friendship he had no reason to doubt, stood speechless
and horrified at the inhuman act of the Chilians, unable to lift a finger
if it would have saved his life.

Jack was standing near to the entrance of the convict cell and as the
Chilian commander raised a hand for his men to fire, he suddenly doubled
himself up like a jack-knife, turning a complete somersault in the
direction of the underground stairway.

His feet had not been secured, though his hands were fastened behind him.

Acting on the impulse of the moment, without any consideration for the
result other than an escape from the murderous fire, he plunged head-first
into the entrance at the very instant the volley of bullets sped on their
deadly mission.

So closely timed were the two actions that the Chilians mistook his jump
for the result of their shots, and an exclamation of satisfaction left the
leader's lips, while no immediate attempt was made to reach the side of
their victim. This enabled Jack to regain his feet and to disappear into
the dark mouth of the cavern before his enemies had recovered from their
surprise.

Though severely shaken up by his precipitation into this retreat,
unheeding the creeping creatures under his feet, which made a furious rush
to and fro, Jack groped his way further and further into the gloomy place.
The damp, sweaty walls covering him with a slimy moisture. Now and then
some of the loosened earth would fall upon him, adding to the uncanny
experience of his advance.

He expected the Chilians would follow him, but he hoped in some way he
might escape them. He kept on without hearing any sound of a pursuit,
until he was suddenly conscious of being confronted by some one, while a
trembling voice called out from the darkness ahead:

"Stop! I am armed, and you come nearer at the peril of your life!"

It was too dark for him to see any one, but he heard a slight movement as
the words were uttered, and he instantly recalled to mind the fact that
the fugitive fleeing from the Chilians was supposed to be hiding in this
place.

Accordingly, as he stopped, he said in a low tone:

"Be careful and you have nothing to fear from me."

Jack had been glad to notice that the unknown had used pure English in
addressing him. In a moment he asked:

"Who are you?"

"A friendless American boy who has been hunted down like a dog because--"

"Fret Offut!" broke in Jack recognizing the other's voice.

"Jack North!" gasped the fugitive "You have betrayed me, Jack!"

"Not a bit of that. I am here on account of you."

That was no time to question one's motives. Jack knew that the other was
his mortal enemy, but just then and there he could do no better than to
forget the past. Whatever the offense he had committed against the
Chilians, Fret was scarcely in worse color with them than himself.

It did not occur to honest Jack North that by delivering up his enemy he
might save his own life.

Though Fret had abused his confidence shamefully, he did not have the wish
to give him over to these foreign pursuers. For aught he knew his
companion might be as guilty of crime against them as against himself.

Meanwhile why had the Chilians not entered the cell in pursuit of their
prisoner? Were they in fear of him? Not so much that as they were in fear
of entering that underground retreat, teeming with superstitious
traditions.

In fact no Chilian could have been induced to enter there under any
provocation short of death!

Mr. Pearce knew this, and when he saw Jack disappear he was confident the
lad was safe for awhile.

It is true the leader of the party did command his men to enter, and
uttered all sorts of threats against them, but they simply listened
without moving.

Neither did their commander offer to lead the way.

Mr. Pearce, knowing this superstitious dread of all Chilians to enter the
subterranean prisons, waited until the leader had stopped commanding and
abusing his soldiers, when he ventured to interpose on Jack's account.

As he was a man of consequence in the opinion of the Chilian chief, his
words soon had the desired effect.

"Somebody,--the person you are in pursuit of--may have landed on the
island last night, but this boy is a friend of mine and knows no more of
him you want than I do. I vouch for his honesty, and as he has been here
over a week you can see that he is not the one you are looking for, who
you say must have come here since sunset yesterday."

No doubt the Chilian was glad to get off so easily in doing what he deemed
was his duty, for he ordered his men to return to their vessel without
further delay.

That was the last to be seen of them, but Mr. Pearce cautiously waited
until he saw the ship sailing away from the island before he spoke to
Jack.

"Come out of that hole if the bugs have not carried you off," he called
out in his blunt way. "The Chilians have gone back to Valparaiso to report
that they could not find their man here."

Jack and Fret Offut had come to something of an understanding, though the
latter was reluctant to meet Mr. Pearce.

The islander was surprised at sight of him, but Jack hastened to say:

"It proves the person those Chilians were so anxious to catch is an
acquaintance of mine, being none other than one of the _Standish's_
passengers."

"A friend of yours, eh? Those infernal--excuse me, I don't believe I will
say it. Come, let's go down to the house."

If Mr. Pearce was not pleased with the appearance of young Offut he did
not show it, though he told Jack privately that it might be best for all
concerned if they should leave the island as soon as an opportunity
offered itself.

"You see another searching party may come at any hour, and I might not be
as successful with another, particularly with two to answer for."

Jack had no desire to remain any longer than he could help, as pleasant as
he had found life with his newly-made friend. He was anxious to get to
Valparaiso before the _Standish_ should leave on her return voyage.

He had another reason, too, and a most important one.

He handed the paper he had picked up at the entrance to the convict cell
to Mr. Pearce for him to read if possible, for it was written in Spanish,
which he could not make out at the time.

Mr. Pearce read it with some difficulty, explaining it as best he could
when he had carefully studied it for half a day.




Chapter VIII

The Lonely Pimento



"The writer of this strange manuscript," began Mr. Pearce, "was evidently
an unlettered person, for it is filled with so many errors as to be
difficult to get the author's meaning in many places. He was also a
fugitive from justice.--I should judge, nearly all his life. He speaks of
the diamond mines of Brazil and the hoarded treasures of the children of
the sun in the same sentence. Then he goes on to describe a wonderful
island that he discovered while hiding from pursuers under the shadows of
the Andes in Tarapaca, Peru. Let me read:

"'I had come out of a dense growth of corkwood to look on a big body of
water hemmed in by the mountains, when I saw some way from the shore a
small island. I noticed it particularly on account of a solitary pimento
tree standing in the centre, with a big rock at its foot.

"'I was hard pressed by my enemies, and seeing what I believed was a hole
under the rock I swam out to the island. I did find plenty of room to hide
in and my pursuers did not think of looking there for me, though they made
the entire circuit of the water.

"'I stayed there two days before I dared to venture out, but it was not
until I had decided to leave the place that I made the most wonderful
discovery of my life.

"'The island, which was made up mostly of rocks, was fairly honey-combed
with tunnels and underground passages, little and big, every one of which
was filled with gold!

"'Gold lay under my feet; gold on my left hand; gold on my right; gold
overhead; gold everywhere! I knew from certain inscriptions that I could
partly decipher that this hidden treasure was a part of the Incas wealth
in the days of Pizzaro.

"'At first I was so bewildered by my discovery that I could do nothing,
but finally I took as much of it as I could carry and left the place.

"'I was, as I thought, careful to note all of its surroundings so I could
come again when I should wish to get the rest of my hoard. I say I did
this carefully, but a year and a half later when I came to get the rest of
my treasure I could not find it. I could not even find the island, though
I went over the ground from Titocaca to Atacama a hundred times.

"'I could not even find the lake!

"'I felt sure I should know that pimento tree anywhere on account of its
odd shape. It had three branches leaving the trunk, one of which ran up
several feet higher than the others, a dead branch pointing to the
northward like a skeleton finger. There was a rim of mountains around the
lake, except for a break in the range on the north.

"'Since I have been there the whole mystery has been solved in my mind and
I can see that the lonely pimento with its skeleton finger is the key. I
was there during the wet--"

"The rest is missing," said Mr. Pearce, "but I have given you the
substance of the illiterate scrawl in tolerable English as far as it
remains. Looks as if the sheet had been torn apart. There is a fortune for
you if you can only find it."

Mr. Pearce spoke somewhat lightly, but Jack could see that he was deeply
interested in the account.

Our hero had been cautious enough not to let Fret Offut into the secret,
knowing he could not be trusted.

"I believe I could find that wonderful island which plays at hide and seek
if I were to try it," said Mr. Pearce. "What do you say to going fortune
hunting?"

Naturally Jack's sanguine nature was thoroughly aroused and nothing could
have suited him better, and from that time they discussed the lost island
with its treasure at every opportunity they had when Fret was not with
them.

There was one serious drawback to their plans.

It might be a long time before they would have an opportunity to leave the
island where Robinson Crusoe had spent so many lonely years. During his
stay there Jack explored every part of the island. He noticed that the
soil had every promise of great fertility, but that even his friend had so
far taken on the laziness of the Chilians that he cultivated as little as
possible. This island had become a sort of rendezvous for the ships
rounding Cape Horn, and many of them had contributed to its natural and
animal wealth by planting orchards and sowing grains and in leaving there
many domesticated creatures.

But at this season of the year it was likely to be considerable time
before a vessel should touch there, and Jack had been on Robinson Crusoe's
island a little over a month, before he found a chance to go to
Valparaiso.

He was glad for the opportunity, but disappointed at the last moment to
find that Mr. Pearce had concluded to give up going with him.

"Too much like work, Jack. You see I have fitted in here, and if we should
find that treasure it would be of no earthly good to me as I am alone in
the world. I hope you will find it, my lad, and that it will help you and
Jenny to make a happy home. Good bye."

"Good bye," said Jack, as he pressed his friend's hand warmly, for he had
grown to like the kindhearted gentleman.

Fret Offut nodded lightly to the other, as he entered the boat which was
to take them to the vessel.

The trip to Valparaiso was uneventful, but there Jack met with a great
disappointment.

The _Standish_ had left for its homeward voyage.

Thus Jack found himself left alone among strangers, save for the
companionship of Fret Offut, who seemed disposed to hold aloof from him.
The other had refused to tell him the cause of his being hunted by the
Chilians, though Jack suspected that it was in some way the result of his
attack upon him. Fret had told enough in his sleep for our hero to know
that he had been arrested for the deed, and that he had afterwards
escaped. But Jack did not feel like saying anything to Fret about it, as
long as he showed no inclination to mention the subject.

Knowing that it might be several months before he could return to his home
and being short of money, Jack at once began to look about for an
opportunity to earn a living.  Unable to find anything to do in
Valparaiso, he walked to Tocopilla, though Fret declined to accompany him.
In this town he found work as a machinist at the princely income of four
Spanish dollars a week. But this was better than nothing and he went to
work with a hearty good will.

He worked in Tocopilla steadily for a month. During the time he heard
nothing from home or from Fret Offut.

He still kept the paper describing the mysterious island holding its vast,
hidden treasure, but he had not felt like undertaking the long journey
necessary to search for it.

Seeing no prospect of advance in his position, Jack was beginning to think
of seeking his fortune elsewhere, when his whole future life was changed
into a different groove by the appearance of a stranger at the place where
he was working.

The newcomer was a Peruvian, who had been an engineer on a railroad
running through the southern part of Peru, but had left to come to
Tocopilla.

He and Jack soon became friends, when the latter said to him one day:

"What was the trouble with engineering, that you should leave to come
here, where you can't begin to get the pay you did there?"

"The pay was good enough, but the shooting was better. I care more for my
life than I do for a few silver doubloons."

"I am afraid I do not understand you. I was not aware that shooting and
engineering went together."

"They do in the case of the St. Resa road, Jack."

"Tell me about it, Francis. I am interested."

"Then I can take out that interest shortly. The road runs through
debatable ground from St. Resa to de la Pama. Not an inch of it but what
is being hotly contested. But it isn't the regulars that make the trouble,
for at present the territory belongs to Peru, though how soon she will
lose it is not for me to say. It's the murderous bush-raiders that are
making the trouble."

"Who are the bush-raiders?"

"That question shows a lamentable ignorance. The bush-raiders are bands of
guerillas united to make war upon anybody and anything that crosses their
path. They pretend to favor Chili, but they are merely using that for a
cloak, and are robbers of the worst class, outlawed by all governments. Of
course you know that Chili and Peru are at war?"

"I have heard of it."

"Well, these bush-raiders, pretending to favor Chili, are making hot times
all along the St. Resa. It is necessary to keep the road open if Peru
hopes to hold the country, and the company are doing their best, backed by
the government. They have had as many as twenty men on in the last six
months.

"The three men on before me were killed by the bush-raiders, and the one
before the first of them fell off and was killed while running the gantlet
of fire set by the fiends."

"You say the road is all in Peru?"

"Yes, in Southern Peru. It runs through the nitrate regions. Bless me if I
don't think there is a fortune in those mines if properly worked.

"Say, Jack, if you are dissatisfied with the money you are making here
there is an opportunity for you. You are young and full of fire, just such
a rash head as the bush-raiders like to get hold of. The company is
offering as high as twenty pistoles a month for a man to run that engine.
More for one day than you get here in a week. But bless me, if every
pistole was a doubloon and I had as many of them as I could carry I would
not try another trip. What are a few paltry pistoles to a man's life?"

"I believe I would like to get that position as engineer on the St. Resa,"
said Jack, after a moment's pause. "I can run an engine, you know."

"You have only to apply for it," replied the other. "But say, Jack, if you
should be fool enough to go up to get killed on that old engine, you had
better take a fireman along with you, for you will not be able to find a
helper up that way."

Another silence fell upon the twain, during which Jack's hands were not as
busy as his brains, until finally he laid aside his work, saying in his
blunt way:

"I shall start within a week for St. Resa, unless in the meantime I get
some sort of word from John Fowler & Company, or from my folks."

After that the days flew by on the wings of the wind. Eagerly Jack waited
for some kind of word from his home, but not a letter reached him, for the
reason that his folks were very poor and had many troubles of their own,
and because the manufacturing company that had sent him to South America
were in financial difficulties.

Sunday passed and then Monday, and the week came to an end. Jack had
another talk with the Peruvian about the railroad position and then
slapped his hands together.

"I'm going to have a try at it, come what may," he said, determinedly.




Chapter IX

Jack Becomes an Engineer



Jack as usual, was as good as his word.

He stopped long enough to lay down his tools and seek the foreman for a
leave of absence.

"Going to St. Resa? You will make the journey but one way. You will never
come back."

But Jack was determined, and nothing that the other could tell him of the
perils he was sure to encounter could deter him from his purpose.

An hour later he turned his back on Tocopilla.

He was passing one of the outer gates, near the edge of the city, when he
was stopped by one of the many beggars which invest the town.

"Only a miserable pittance," implored the ragged wretch, holding out a
dirty hand for the gift.

Something in the beggar's tone and manner arrested Jack's attention. He
had been addressed in English, which was unusual, but there was more than
the language to attract him to the poor alms seeker.

Then, as he bent a closer gaze on the person, he exclaimed:

"Fret Offut! can this be you?"

"Jack North!" exclaimed the other. "I did not think of seeing you here."

"Nor I you, most of all in this condition."

"It was all I could do, Jack," whined the other. "I have had such bad luck
since you left me! But ain't you looking like a peacock!"

"I have managed to get a living by working hard."

"I'll warrant you have; but I wouldn't work at the starvation wages they
offered me. Say, where are you going?"

"To St. Resa."

"In South Peru?"

"Yes."

"What do you expect to do there?"

"Going to apply for a situation as engineer on a railroad."

"Whew! I heard a man say this morning they were offering big pay. Let me
go with you, Jack? You will do this for old time's sake? I will be
fireman."

Jack's first thought was to refuse the other's company. He felt that Fret
had already done him harm enough, and that his presence would be a
positive injury to him. But upon second thought he became more generous.
In spite of all Fret had done against him he could not help pitying the
young fellow now in his forlorn condition, and thus he said:

"If you will promise that you will not try to make trouble for me and that
you will do the very best you can for yourself. You mustn't forget, too,
that you are going where you may not come back alive."

Fret Offut promised very solemnly to all that Jack asked, and the couple
started on their hazardous journey into the interior of the country which
was about to become the battleground of three nations.

They received a warm welcome at the railroad company's office as soon as
the object of their call was known. It had been a week since the last
train had gone over the route, and a big accumulation of freight wanted to
be moved. They were offered big wages and accepted.

"Well, Fret, we're in for it now," said Jack, as they went to the station
to make their first trip.

The young fireman made no reply. He was already beginning to regret the
step he had taken, though Jack's fearlessness was not without its effect
on him.

A big crowd was at the station to see the train start, which made Fret
feel the importance of his position.

The train had a fifty-mile run and Jack found that he was expected to make
it and return the same day. This did not seem a difficult task, providing
the bush-raiders let them alone.

The road was in a terrible condition, yet the first trip was made without
adventure and Fret's spirits rose.

"Probably the bush-raiders did not know we were going yesterday," said
Jack, as his helper was boasting of their easy job.

Jack could not say as much when he got back from his second trip, for no
less than three shots had been fired into the caboose.

Fret Offut was in genuine alarm. The situation was worse than had been
described to Jack. Reports showed that the bush-raiders were gaining in
numbers every day, and growing more bold as they increased in strength.
The country, sparsely settled, through which the railroad ran seemed
especially fitted for their guerrilla warfare, to say nothing of the poor
state of the road-bed, which at places actually made the passage
dangerous. Then, too, the cars and engine were cheap and simple affairs,
offering no protection from the bullets of the enemies.

But Jack had no intention of giving up at this stage of the situation, and
Fret concluded to risk a third trip.

The company were anxious for the train to be kept running, but offered no
protection, if it could supply any.

The round trip on this day was made without any shots being fired by the
enemies, though at least twenty bush-raiders were seen drawn up in sight
of the train, as it wound its way through one of the gloomiest spots of
the entire route.

One of the disreputable looking party waved a red cloth on the muzzle of
his short-barreled carbine as they whisked past.

"Look out for to-morrow," said Jack. "That looks to me like a sort of
warning."

It proved that he was not the only one who had his suspicions, for as he
swung himself upon the engine the following morning some one stepped from
out of the motley crowd collected about the station and thrusting a scrap
of paper into his hand instantly disappeared.

As soon as they were fairly on their way Jack smoothed out the crumpled
paper to read in a scrawling hand:

"Look out for the bush-raiders to-day."

The sheet bore no signature or date.

"Looks like a scare by some one," remarked Jack, as he handed the missive
to Fret. "But there can be no harm in keeping a sharp lookout," he
admitted. "I suppose the trouble has got to begin soon, and it might as
well be to-day as to-morrow."

Fret Offut, whose stock of courage was small, turned pale, as he read the
brief message:

"You ain't going to keep on, Jack?"

"What else are we hired for? We should be the laughing stock of the
country if we stopped now."

"But this warning makes it different."

"Not a bit as I can see. We came up here expecting to take our chances,
and as for me it seems the bush-raiders have been very modest in opening
proceedings. It is too late for us to turn back. I--"

"No--no! Stop, Jack, and I will get off."

"If you don't get off until I stop you will ride into de la Pama. Now
don't be foolish and let that little piece of paper upset you. It was no
more than we expected. Keep a cool head and stand to your post.

"It may not be as bad as it threatens. But if you persist in leaving you
can do so when we have made this trip. I don't propose to be left in the
lurch by losing my fireman at a time I cannot afford to let him go."

Jack's quiet determination and assurance served to quiet Fret's fears, so
he said nothing further about quitting his duty.

After leaving St. Resa, the train, which was a mixed one, made up of two
passenger coaches and a dozen freight cars, had to stop at irregular
intervals, following which the road ran through a twenty-mile wilderness,
the most of the way rugged in the extreme.

It was during this part of the journey that Jack expected trouble if
anywhere, and as he approached the broken region he kept a sharp watch on
every hand.

Fret, though pale and trembling, kept his post.

"Give me every pound of steam possible," said Jack. "If we don't go
through Whirlwind Gap flying it will be because the old engine has lost
her cunning."

They were now rushing along at a tremendous rate of speed considering the
condition of the track, and the old engine rocked and lurched as if it
would leave the track at any moment. There were but a few passengers
aboard, for only those who were compelled to do so traveled during this
dangerous period.  Jack knew there was a valuable freight behind him, to
say nothing of human lives, and he was determined to get into de la Pama
if it lay in his power.

Thus, with a full realization of the peril of his situation, he was
standing at his post, with one hand on the throttle and the other on the
reversing lever, peering intently ahead, taking in every object as they
sped furiously over the rails, when he suddenly beheld a sight which for a
moment fairly took away his breath.

They were swiftly approaching the foot of a high bluff, upon the top of
which he had discovered a dozen of the bush-raiders looking down upon him.
But they were not the most startling part of what he saw and heard.

As the train dashed madly under the rocky wall, above its terrific thunder
rang a deafening crash, and he saw with horror a huge bowlder coming down
the side of the cliff, directly toward the engine!

It had been loosened from its bed by the bush-raiders, and so well had
they timed their work that it would be impossible for the engine to get
beyond its reach before the rock should fall upon it!

It would be equally hazardous to try and stop the train.

Fret Offut had seen the appalling sight, and with a despairing cry,
feeling that it would be death to remain on the engine, he leaped far out
over the embankment.

"Fret!" cried Jack, but no answer came back to the call.

Jack North felt that it was all over with him, but true to the instinct of
his nature, he stood bravely at his post.




Chapter X

A Narrow Escape



With the wild cry of Fret Offut and the exultant yells of the bush-raiders
ringing in his ears above the thunder of the rushing train, Jack North
heard the ominous crash, of the descending bowlder, and saw with a dazed
look its swift approach.

The locomotive, throbbing and panting like a human being in a race for
life, was fairly flying along the winding track.

It all lasted but a moment, the downward rush of the deadly body, the
cries of exultation and despair, the lightning-like passing of the fatal
spot by the engine, and the ordeal was over as quickly as it had come!

The descent of the ponderous missile was swift and sure until a projection
on the side of the cliff was reached, when with a terrific concussion the
bowlder glanced. It suddenly shot outward like a cannon ball, and was
carried fairly over the engine into the gulch below.

Jack witnessed this miraculous movement with breathless eagerness
bordering upon terror.

The huge rock passed so near that it scraped the top of the caboose, and
the current of air it raised swept the boy engineer's cap from his head.

The train had got its length beyond the place before Jack could realize
that he had escaped.

The bush-raiders reminded him of it then, if he needed any further
notification, by a volley of bullets and renewed yells of rage.

Though some of the leaden missiles flew uncomfortably near his head, Jack
was unharmed, and as he was borne on by the iron horse around the next
curve in the track, leaving his enemies out of sight, he offered a prayer
of thankfulness for his providential escape.

Fret, he was certain, must have been killed by his mad leap from the
engine. As much as he would have liked to have gone back and looked for
the youth, he knew such a course would have been the height of folly.
Besides his own life to look after, there were the passengers who had
intrusted themselves to his care.

"Poor Fret! I could do no good now, and I must remember the others. If you
had only remained on the engine it would have been better for you."

To his infinite relief, Jack saw nor heard nothing further of the baffled
bush-raiders, who must have been greatly surprised at the escape of the
train with its rich freight.

At the first station, which was several miles away from the scene of the
outlaws' attack, the young engineer told of the loss of his fireman and
his own narrow escape from death, when an armed squad of men started to
search for the body of the missing youth, and to rout the bush-raiders if
they could be found.

Finding an assistant at this place, Jack finished his run to de la Pama
and then came back to this station, which was known as Resaca.

The relief party had not returned, but Jack was told that a bridge had
been found to be unsafe for the passage of the train, so he could not
reach St Resa that day, while it might be a week before the road would be
in a condition to resume his regular trips. But he was willingly allowed
to start after the relief party with the engine and one car, accompanied
by a dozen armed men.

They were approaching the bridge mentioned, when they met the others
coming back, bearing in their midst the lifeless form of Fret Offut.

Jack immediately stopped to have the body of his associate put on the car,
when he started on the return to Resaca.

The untimely fate of Fret Offut impressed him with the great uncertainty
of life. It was true the other had never been his friend, but now that was
forgotten and he felt a deep regret over the youth's sad end.

The return to Resaca was made in safety. In fact nothing had been seen of
the raiders since the start, and it was uncertain what might be their next
move.

The following day Jack saw that Fret's body was given burial in a little
plot within sight of the low-walled church of this clustered settlement,
he being the only mourner.

"If I should fall in my hazardous work, I could not expect as much as poor
Fret gets in this land of strangers. The last bond between this wild
country and home seems to be broken. Little did we think of this, Fret,
when we anticipated that South American trip!"

The last sad duty done for Fret Offut, and finding that the bridge would
not be repaired inside of a week, Jack resolved to take a little outing on
his own account.

He still carried with him the paper so strangely found on Robinson Crusoe
island, and he was determined to make a search for the hidden treasure
which it mentioned.

Accordingly, mounted on a small but sure-footed and faithful pony, with a
supply of provisions, Jack set out on his uncertain journey without
telling any one his intentions, little dreaming of the result which was to
come of his secret movement.

He believed the mysterious island was nearly north of Resaca, so he shaped
his course in that direction, keeping a sharp lookout for any enemy that
might be in his pathway.

He was in the heart of the great dry region of South America, a district
of nearly a thousand miles in length, where rain seldom if ever falls, and
the country is afforded sufficient moisture by the sea vapors condensed on
the Andes and sent down upon the plains and lowlands. The desert of
Atacama lay many miles to the south, but as he progressed he often found
sections of the country without a thing growing upon the land, though
sometimes these spots were bordered by the most abundant growth he had
ever seen, even in that realm of grand forests and magnificent flora.

Everywhere, save on these dark patches of waste land, the vegetation was
on the boldest scale imaginable, the magnitude of the trees being simply
beyond the comprehension of him who had never seen them, while some of
even the largest were adorned with beautiful flowers, making them seem
like gardens of themselves.

On account of the density of the growth, Jack often found it difficult to
advance, and many times he was obliged to make long detours in order to
reach a certain point.

Zig-zagging about, always keeping his eyes open for bush-raiders, wild
beasts, and, above all, for the strange island, he had spent four days in
the wilderness, when he felt that it was time for him to think of
returning to civilization.

He had seen no sign of the looked-for body of inland water with its
treasure island, though the increasing presence of cinchona trees told him
that he was already ascending into the region of the Peruvian Andes.

"I am sure it is at the foot of these mountains that the strange island
exists," he thought, as he paused on the summit of one of the foothills of
the snow-crowned Monarch of Mountains. "But there is no sign of water, and
how can I expect to find an island where there is no water?"

The involuntary speech brought a smile to his lips. As he would explain
his thoughts, he said aloud:

"Somehow I got it into my head that there was a lake in this region, and
there I was to find my treasure island. But I have been a fool to look for
either. Come, Juan," patting the neck of his pony, "let us go back while
we have sense enough to do so."

But while he spoke he lingered around the place, as if there was some
strong fascination for him. It was a beautiful scene, made up almost
entirely of forest, but such a forest as only Peru, with its wonderful
natural wealth, can produce.

The trees were composed largely of rosewoods in all their varied beauty,
the giant quassia in all their hues and tints of foliage, with a
sprinkling of cinchona, lending a happy blending of more sober coloring,
while from the lowlands was wafted to him on the gentle breeze of that
tropical clime the perfume of the tinga.

The finger of silence lay on the lip of Nature, even the broad leaves of
the quassia rising and falling on the shifting breaths of air, without
that peculiar rustling sound generally belonging to the forest domain.

It was the most beautiful scene he had ever looked upon, and as he allowed
his gaze to slowly move around the encircling country, he found himself
looking down upon the strangest valley or mountain pocket he had ever
beheld.

The singular feature of this isolated, wood-environed retreat was its
complete absence of all kinds of growth, except for a sort of silky grass
which covered its uneven surface like a rich carpet of the deepest green
tint. Near the centre was an oval elevation of rock and earth higher by a
few feet than knobs and miniature hills which dotted it elsewhere.

It was bare of vegetation, not even the silken tasia ornamenting its
sides, though a solitary tree did rise in lonely grandeur from its utmost
crest.

Jack uttered a low exclamation as he saw that this tree was a pimento.

In a moment his mind reverted to the description given in the strange
manuscript, but a look of disappointment succeeded his eager anticipation.

"What a fool!" he exclaimed. "That tree stood on an island--"

A rustle in the undergrowth arrested his attention at that moment, and,
before he could avoid the unexpected attack, a dark lissom body shot
through the air, to alight squarely upon his pony, that, with a snort of
terror, started madly through the growth.




Chapter XI

Under the Head of a Jaguar



Jack was nearly unseated by the sudden dash of his pony, and managing to
retain his position he was in imminent danger of being swept off by the
branches of the trees.

The deep growl of the creature at his back rang in his ears, and he could
feel the poor pony quiver in every muscle, as the fearful claws of the
brute were buried deep into its flesh.

This occupied but a moment's time from the attack of the wild beast to the
end of the pony's flight, but it was such a moment as Jack never forgot.

He had seen a precipice in the pathway of the terrified animal, but not in
season to stop the maddened creature or turn it aside, though he did make
a frantic effort to do so. As if bent upon its own destruction, the pony
made a suicidal leap down the precipitous descent.

The frightened creature struck upon its feet, but immediately fell over on
its right side, carrying its rider with it and pinning him under its body.

The savage beast had not lost its hold, and as Jack lay there within its
deadly reach he saw for the first time that it was the most dreaded of the
wild beasts of South America, the jaguar.

He had barely taken a swift glance at the furious brute before a warning
growl above him broke the momentary silence and then a second form, the
mate of that beside him, plunged down from the top of the cliff, landing
beside the first, that uttered a fierce growl at the same time.

Jack's heart fairly stopped its beating, and finding himself unable to
move his right limb, he felt that it was all over with him.

The pony had apparently been killed by its fall, together with the attack
of the jaguar, as it did not move after it fell over on its side.

The ferocious beasts, with a succession of sharp growls and snarls, began
to feast upon the still warm carcass of the poor horse.

It was fortunate, and showed Jack's remarkable presence of mind as well,
that at that critical moment he remembered that old hunters had said if
one feigned death he might escape the attack of a wild beast under
ordinary circumstances, the story of Dr. Livingstone lying under the
lion's paw coming vividly into his mind. But his left leg lay on top of
the pony's body and close to where the two jaguars were exercising their
teeth and claws on the flesh.

That morning before starting from Resaca he had put on a pair of boots
with stout tops as a means of protection from the bushes and brambles he
might encounter on his long ride. But he could not hope these would
protect him long, if at all, from the attacks of the voracious brutes.

Words cannot describe his feelings as he lay there listening to the
ominous growls and crunching of the hungry animals, expecting every moment
to feel their sharp teeth in his own flesh.

Two or three times he felt one or the other of the jaguars push savagely
against his foot, which was lifted and carried forward upon the pony's
neck in their eagerness to get at the warm meat.

All of that horrible scene Jack heard and felt rather than saw, for he did
not dare to open his eyes--dare to draw a full breath.

After awhile he heard one of the pair move away a short distance, and he
could hear it licking its dripping chops after its feast.

Its mate continued its voracious attacks upon the carcass, the grinding of
its jaws and the crackling of the pony's bones making horrible sounds for
the helpless boy.

When this had continued for several minutes longer, the second jaguar
stopped eating and began to lick Jack's boots.

Nothing so far had equaled the horror of that sensation.

It seemed to Jack that he must go mad if it continued long!

After what seemed a long time to him in his intense agony, the dull,
rasping sound ceased; the jaguar had ended its licking, but, as if loath
to leave the spot, it allowed its head to fall forward on the half eaten
body, with its nostrils lying on Jack's foot. Its slow and regular
breathing finally told that it had fallen asleep after eating its dinner.

Jack a little later heard the cat-like steps of its mate leaving the
place, until the pitter-patter died away in the distance.

Then, for the first time, he dared to open his eyes, though he did not
venture to move his head or hand a particle.

He could see the sleeping jaguar's head and that was all that was in sight
of the creature, that still remained motionless but likely to start up at
his first movement.

As Jack's gaze followed his narrow orbit of vision he soon saw his
firearm, which had slipped from him in his ride over the precipice and
fallen near where he lay in that terrible situation.

He had no sooner seen the weapon than a wild desire to get possession of
it filled his mind. If he only had that in his hands he believed he could
shoot the jaguar before it could do him harm.

The longer he pondered upon this the stronger became the desire to make
the attempt. Failure could not be any worse than that awful suspense,
which in all probability must end in death.

Then, as he realized that the jaguar's mate might return at any moment, he
resolved to make the bold venture without more delay.

He was first careful to make himself sure that the brute was still asleep,
when he slowly and cautiously raised his hand enough to reach for the
carbine, which fortunately lay stock toward him.

Not a sound broke the deathlike stillness of the lonely scene, save the
labored breathing of the sleeping jaguar.

Never allowing his gaze to leave the creature, he continued to reach for
the firearm until he felt his hand touch the stock.

As complete control as he had maintained over himself so far in the trying
ordeal, at this critical moment he so far forgot himself as to draw a long
breath--a breath of relief to think that he had something with which to
defend himself.

That breath was instantly answered by a terrific growl!

It had awakened the light-sleeping beast, which quickly raised its head,
and its whole appearance immediately changed, as it glared furiously
around.

It seemed to realize at once that it had been fooled by this human
creature within its clutch, and with another growl, louder, fiercer and
more startling than any yet, it prepared to spring on its new victim.

But it was no quicker of action than Jack, who knew that his life hung on
prompt work. At the same time he lifted the carbine from the ground, he
cocked the weapon. At that moment the open jaws of the aroused jaguar were
thrust into his face, and the hot breath of the wild creature fanned his
cheek. The next instant he ran the muzzle of the firearm into the maddened
brute's throat and pulled the trigger.

A dull report followed, the jaguar's head was blown into fragments, and
Jack knew that his life was saved.




Chapter XII

Put to the Test



Though he had no more to fear from this jaguar, Jack knew that its mate
was likely to return at any moment, and as soon as he had recovered
somewhat from the effect of the ordeal through which he had passed, he
freed himself from the weight of the pony's body.

He was glad to find that his limb had not received any serious injury,
though it was so paralyzed from lying under the pressure that it was a few
minutes before he could stand alone.

But he lost no more time than he could avoid before he left the place,
feeling that his situation even then was not pleasant to contemplate. He
was not only afoot in the heart of a trackless wilderness, but many miles
from the nearest point of civilization.

Half an hour after leaving the scene of the jaguar's attack, he made a
discovery which caused him no little concern.

He had lost his compass.

Realizing the risk of returning to the fatal spot, as well as the
uncertainty of finding the lost instrument, he kept on without it,
endeavoring to pursue as direct a course as possible.

In this he was unsuccessful, and two days later he was wandering at random
through the intricate labyrinths of a Peruvian forest, nearly worn out and
disheartened.

Hoping that his shots might be heard by some one who would come to his
rescue, he had fired all but the last load of ammunition he had with him,
and that charge was in his carbine.

"I might as well discharge that," he said to himself. "It is my last
chance and I might as well take it now as later. It is useless for me to
try to find my way out of this wilderness."

In his desperation he cocked the weapon, and pointing it skyward pulled
the trigger.

Loud and long rang out the report on the deep silence of the forest, the
distant foothills taking up the sound and flinging it back to the valleys
in echoes that repeated the detonation far and wide. As the last sullen
sound died away in the distance he leaned against one of the trees, saying
half aloud:

"I might as well meet the worst here as anywhere."

Five, ten, fifteen minutes passed away, and satisfied that his last shot
had been fired in vain, Jack started to resume his aimless wanderings,
when the sound of footsteps fell upon his ears.

At first he thought it might be some wild beast prowling through the
woods, but it was not long before a human figure burst into sight.

There was little of beauty in the youthful stranger who had thus
unceremoniously appeared, but Jack had never been so glad to see any one
in his life.

At sight of his woebegone countenance the newcomer came to a sudden halt
in his impetuous advance, exclaiming in a voice with a peculiar and
characteristic nasal twang:

"Consarn ye! who air yeou scrouched down there in that way? Aair yeou the
feller who has been wasting ammunition so like a scart peon?"

The speaker's tone was not unfriendly, and Jack was nearly overjoyed to
find that the new-comer was not a Peruvian.

Springing from his seat on a fallen tree, where he had sunk in his
respair, he cried in genuine gladness:

"You're an American!"

"No more'n yeou air!" replied the other, brushing back his long blonde
hair from his forehead as he spoke, and looking straight into our hero's
countenance with a pair of deep blue eyes.

Then, when the two had stared upon each other for fully a minute, both
burst into a fit of laughter.

"Shoo neow!" exclaimed the Yankee boy, "who air yeou and what air yeou
doing here?"

"I might ask the same question of you," replied Jack. "My name is John
North and I come from Banton, Connecticut.

"Bet yeou air called Jack every time. My name is Plummer Plucky, but I'm
called Plum for short, though that is all they can make short about me. I
hail from _New_ England too, and I'll bet my dad is hoeing taters in
sight of Plymouth Rock."

"I am lost in this wilderness," went on Jack. "I hope you can show me the
way out."

"Bet your boots on that. I live, leastways stop, not three hours' tramp
from here, though if yeou had come to-morrer yeou wouldn't found me here.
I have been working on the estancia of Don de Estuaray, the dirtiest,
meanest, miserliest, yellowest old Spaniard that ever drew the breath o'
this beautiful country."

"Evidently you love the Don," said Jack, with a smile.

"Do I? Do you know what he pays me fer work thet's enought to kill a man?"

"I haven't the slightest idea."

"No more you have. He pays me three dollars and sixty cents a month--think
of it--if you can!"

"That's a small fortune" went on Jack. He rather liked the fellow before
him. "I suppose you've got a pile saved up in the bank out of it."

"Think so? Consarn ye, yer ain't got no right to think so!" And now the
other really looked somewhat angry.

"No, I don't think so," answered Jack, promptly. "I was only fooling. They
don't pay big wages down here--I've found that out--down near the coast,
where I worked at starvation wages myself."

"Wall, I aint jest starved," said the other youth, somewhat mollified. "I
git feed enough--leas'-wise, I take what I want. But it ain't enough
money--no it ain't--nohow, consarn him anyway!"

Jack had too much at stake to desire a quarrel with his new-found
acquaintance, so he hastened to say:

"I hope you will forgive me if I have said anything to offend. I trust we
shall be friends."

Whatever of anger Plum had shown quickly left his honest countenance, and
frankly holding out a hand, he said:

"I never pick a quarrel with any one, but I won't let any one tread on my
toes. I reckon we shall be friends."

The clasp of the hands which followed cemented the firmest friendship of
Jack North's life, an acquaintance which, notwithstanding its inauspicious
beginning, was destined to ripen into a heart-felt intimacy.

The hand-shaking over, the twain, Plum leading the way, started in the
direction whence the latter had come at the sound of Jack's carbine. On
the way toward the estancia where the former had been working, our hero
learned the complete story of his past life; how he had left home to win a
fortune and drifted over the world until he was now employed by this Don
de Estuaray at the princely sum which had been the crumb of argument
between them a few minutes before.

Jack in turn told the other his story, except that part bearing upon the
island of treasure, and long before they had reached signs of civilization
they had become fast friends.

So favorably impressed was Jack with the appearance of his new-found chum
that he proposed that Plum should apply for the position of fireman on the
St. Resa railroad, a proposition which met the other boy's hearty approval
the moment he learned the wages he was likely to get His first question
was:

"Do yeou s'pose they will have me?"

"Gladly. It isn't a question of that, but whether you have the sand to
stand up in a spot where you are likely to lose your life any minute."

"Reckon I can stand up where you can, and if I do lay down it will be to
stay there. Give me your hand, old feller. I like yeou."

They were now approaching the estancia of Don de Estuaray, who lived in a
pleasant valley several miles from any settlement, and as they advanced
Jack could not help noticing the tall growth of a patch of vegetation on
their right hand, as they were entering the spacious grounds.

To his wonder he saw cotton plants that reached far above his head and
sugar cane which stood like forest trees. Plum Plucky, standing on his
shoulders, with Fret Offut, had he been living then and there, on his
shoulders, could not have reached the top of the lowest plants!

He saw indigo plants that amazed him for their size, and altogether it was
such a sight as he had never seen.

A short distance away he saw a field of oats which reared their heads into
the air to a height of more than fifteen feet.

Plum Plucky seeing the look of surprise on his countenance, said:

"Can't guess what made that stuff grow so? I can tell you. I just brought
down some of that funny dirt found in the barren spots on the hills yonder
and put a good lot round the roots. It beats all creation how it sends the
stuff into the air. The don said I'd kill it all, but I knowed better, for
I had seen the wild stuff growing like fun all round the edges of sich
places. But it don't seem to hitch on in the spots themselves. S'pect it's
too stout there."

Jack at once recalled the accounts he had heard of the nitrate beds on the
Peruvian hills, though he did not dream then of the importance of this
discovery to him.

Our hero was anxious to get back to Resaca, knowing that his prolonged
absence might have already cost him his situation as engineer on the
railroad, and as Plum Plucky had fully decided to go with him, they lost
no further time in starting for that place.

They found the railroad officials in a fever of excitement.

Believing that Jack had left them and finding no one to take his place,
the bush-raiders having grown bolder in their depredations, in their
despair, the managers were offering double their previous pay for a man
who would dare to undertake the work of getting a train through from St.
Resa to de la Pama.

Jack felt unbounded delight upon finding that the pay had been raised to
over a hundred dollars a trip, and without any explanation he offered
himself for the situation a second time.

He was gladly accepted, with no questions asked while Plum was given the
position of fireman at a salary which caused him to look with amazement.

"Well!" he exclaimed, "it's too good to last."

"Wait till you meet the bush-raiders," said Jack.

"I reckon I can take any medicine that you can," was the answer, and the
boy engineer realized that he had filled Fret Offut's place with a
companion of altogether different make-up.

Somewhat to their surprise three trips were made without any molestation
from the outlaw band, when the young couple were put to a test few would
have the courage to meet.

A party of Peruvian soldiers had been sent out to protect, as far as
possible, the road, but upon this run Jack learned at a small station
before coming to the stream where the bridge had been repaired, that this
squad had been completely routed by the outlaws of the forest, and the
victorious raiders were lying in wait for the train.

In this dangerous prospect every passenger left the cars at this place,
but the order came for the train to go on if a suitable escort could be
raised.

In twenty minutes as many armed men were waiting a start, though, as Jack
looked over the motley party, he realized that not one of them would be
worth a fig in a fight with the bush-raiders. Worse than that, he felt
confident that the majority, if not all, were in league with the outlaws,
and when the proper time came would openly join with them in trying to
capture the train.

But the station agent, blind to this fact, priding himself upon having
done his duty, pompously ordered Jack to proceed on his way.

As if not to be outdone, the conductor who remained with one brakeman,
reiterated the command.

"It looks so we were in for it," said Jack, as he took his post at the
lever. "What do you say, Plum, have you the grit to try it?"

"I am with you, Jack, let come what may. See! I have got on a smashing
head of steam."

Without another word Jack pulled the bell-cord, and, throwing the valves
wide open, sent the train thundering out of the station along the gleaming
track into dangers which the bravest would not have cared to anticipate.




Chapter XIII

Precious Moments



The little crowd at the station waved their hands and gave expression to
prolonged cries, as the train thundered away on its perilous run.

Soon beyond the hearing of these outcries the two youths, standing so
bravely at their posts, heard no sound save the deep rumbling of the
engine and cars, as they sped swiftly on their way through the wilderness.

Jack was the first to speak.

"Fix the fire so you can leave it for a short time if necessary, Plum."

"Leave it any time, Jack. I wasn't so green firing as they thought me.
Reckon my firing Joe Staples' old saw-mill didn't hurt me any for this
business."

"Did you burn it down, Plum, or was it sav--"

"Scat! you know what I mean. But do yeou begin to see anything ahead?"

"I could hardly expect to so soon, for they will be pretty sure to keep
out of sight until we are into their trap."

"Do yeou think they will have a rock on the track?"

"Perhaps some obstruction. I can't just imagine how they will take us this
time."

"Say, Jack, what do yeou think of 'em fellers on the train?"

The words seemed so much like an echo of his own thoughts that the boy
engineer started with surprise at the question.

"I'll bet yeou," continued Plum, "they'll make us more trouble than the
fellers in the bushes."

"Plum Plucky, you just speak my mind. I was thinking how we could best get
rid of them."

"Bully for yeou, Jack North! Tell me what to do and I'm with yeou tooth
and nail."

"In one respect we are fortunate," said Jack, in a tone which showed that
he had been pondering carefully over the matter. "The car they are in is
to the extreme rear."

"You intend to take the freight through if possible?"

"At any cost."

"Well, then, what does their being in the rear car have to do with our
getting the rest through? Looks so they air fixed to help the raiders best
so."

"Why simply--look yonder!" said Jack, pointing suddenly a little to their
right in the distance ahead.

Plum Plucky did as he was told.

"What is it, Jack, a big rock?"

"Rock? No! Look over those tree-tops; don't you see that thin column of
smoke rising high into the air and as straight as a church spire?"

"Gosh! yes. What of it? There can't be much wind."

"It is a signal of the bush-raiders."

"S'pose it is?"

The train was now winding through the valley of the Rio Tasma, and the
sullen roar of the mountain stream was beginning to be heard above the
thunder of the cars, which were rushing along at a rapid rate.

"I am sure of it," replied Jack, as he continued to watch the ascending
smoke, though without neglecting his survey ahead. "What else can it
mean?"

"Sure enough."

"Do you think we have a brakeman we can count on in case of an attack?"

Plum hesitated a moment before replying.

"Not unless it is little Pedro."

"Just my mind. See! the smoke is dying out. Whatever message they had to
make has been made."

"What do you think it could be?"

"I will tell you what I think. Just before that column appeared we must
have been in sight of whoever was on that height, and they gave that as a
signal that we were coming."

"Jack you are nobody's fool; but couldn't they hear the sound of the
train?"

"Not above the roar of the river if they are on the other side."

"I didn't think of that. But what about little Pedro?"

"Only this: In case those chaps in the rear car show signs of being
against us we must get rid of them as soon as possible. Do you think you
can go back to Pedro?"

"Yes."

"Well, do so at once and return as soon as you can, for every moment is
precious now. Tell Pedro the moment he hears the bell ring to uncouple the
rear car. Mind you, only that. He must be there ready at all times until
we have passed through the woods. Get back as soon as you can."

"You can count on that," and with these words Plum began to climb over the
tender toward the line of cars behind.

The bridge of the Rio Tasma was now in plain sight, and Jack's whole
attention was fixed upon the new structure that spanned the rapid stream.

Everything seemed all right there, so he allowed the train to rush on at
unabated speed.

There was a wild fascination about this perilous trip that Jack could not
shake off. Every moment he expected to run into some unknown danger, and
he would not have been surprised to find the bridge suddenly collapsing
beneath the train.

But nothing of the kind occurred, and the engine was speedily across the
stream.

He was approaching the place where he had so narrowly escaped death from
the falling bowlder, and he could not help glancing toward the top of the
cliff, as he was carried around the curve.

At that moment the report of a gun rang out sharply on the air, the sound
coming from the rear of the train.

Then an answering report came from the depths of the forest ahead!

"The men in the car are signaling to the raiders!" flashed through Jack's
mind, and, simultaneously with the thought, he gave the bell cord a quick
jerk.

"If Plum has only got there," he thought, as he turned his gaze upon the
course ahead.

He knew that Plum nor Pedro could not uncouple the car as long as they
were climbing the upgrade, but immediately beyond the bend a descent was
made into the valley.

He was rapidly approaching the summit, when he made a discovery which sent
a thrill of horror through his frame.

Not a hundred yards ahead lay on the right hand rail a huge bowlder!

That the bush-raiders had put it there to wreck the train he had no doubt.

Just then the train gave a sharp lurch, and the reports of firearms pealed
above the din of the moving train.

Instantly the bell cord was pulled vigorously three or four times.

Plum Plucky was in trouble.




Chapter XVI

The Attack on the Train



The firing from the rear increased, but Jack had enough to attend to
without giving it a second thought.

Out from the depths of the forest overhanging the track ahead had sprung a
score or more of armed men.

Expecting the terrible collision they had planned, they had leaped upon
the track in front of the oncoming train, flourishing their weapons and
uttering wild yells of triumph.

It was a moment to Jack North which meant all to him. To stop the train
was to throw it into the hands of his enemies; to keep on was like rushing
into the very jaws of destruction. The commotion still raging at the rear
of the train, the exulting fiends in the pathway ahead, and not less the
silent but ominous bowlder on the gleaming track foretold the end, let him
act as he might.

With that unerring precision of gaze which never failed him, Jack saw that
the stone lay at such a place and in such a position that the engine would
not strike it squarely, but sidewise, as it swept around the curve. To
make it more favorable the obstruction, as has been said, lay on the
right, or outside rail.

Had it been on the opposite one all would have been changed to a terrible
certainty.

There was no cowcatcher in front, similar to those seen on the engines in
this country, but there was a heavy iron fender in its stead, which
presented a square defense. This bar would strike the rock below
midweight, and in such an oblique manner that he believed the barrier
would be hurled from the track without derailing the engine.

Jack understood that he was taking a fearful risk, but with all these
favoring circumstances it could not be more disastrous than to stop and to
fall easy victims to the bush-raiders and their allies.

These thoughts flashed through his mind and he resolved to keep on at all
hazards. Thus he let on all the steam in reserve and stood grimly at his
post.

The engine obeyed like a living creature. It gave a mighty plunge forward
and dashed upon the ponderous barrier disputing its advance.

The suspense was of brief duration, but Jack's thoughts flew fast and far.
He realized that if the engine failed to clear the track it would be all
over with him in a moment.

He was thinking of Jenny when the shock came with a force which fairly
lifted the heavy engine! A crash and another shock threw him face downward
on the floor of the cab.

He felt that the crisis had been passed and the train was still rushing
on. Furious yells--yells that made the wildwoods ring with their
intonations--filed his ears, and a volley of bullets whistled around his
head.

He looked up and saw the trees rushing past him at a terrific speed.

A backward glance showed him some of the outlaws beside the track, while
others were scattered on both side of the rails, where the engine had
flung them in heaps.

At the bottom of the valley lay the big bowlder, which had been dislodged
and hurled into the depths.

The front of the engine showed the marks of its fearful blow, and he began
to realize more fully the awful risk he had taken.

The firing from the rear car had ceased, and wondering what had become of
Plum Plucky, he pulled the bell cord once.

A prompt response was given by two violent jerks on the rope, when he knew
that Plum was alive and on the train.

He did not have long to wait before he heard some one crawling over the
tender, and a moment later his fireman dropped beside him.

"Golly, Jack!" exclaimed Plum, "wasn't that a squeezer?"

"What have you done?" asked Jack.

"We've got 'em!" beginning to execute a dance on the footboard.

"What do you mean? Have you lost your senses?"

"I mean we've got the traitors as tight as a squirrel in a box-trap. Some
of 'em jumped off and were killed, but we've got the most of 'em, and
Pedro is holding 'em there fast."

The train had slowed so the two could talk as they continued on.

"I don't understand you, Plum," said Jack, ready to believe almost
anything after what he had passed through.

"Well, yeou see I just played a Yankee trick on 'em. Just as I had got
back to Pedro, and before I could tell him what to do, some of the men
come out of the car, and I see they were going to uncouple it just as you
had told me to! By that I knew some trick was up, and before they could
tell what had struck 'em I pushed the sinners back into the car and shut
the door. No sooner had I done that than I covered 'em with my gun and
asked Pedro to help me. In the midst of it there came that awful chuck,
when I thought for a minute we'd all gone together. But it was soon over,
and Perdo is standing guard over our prisoners. As I said some of 'em
jumped off, but I guess they won't jump ag'in. Do yeou s'pose the trouble
is over?"

At first Jack could scarcely believe the other's story, but he saw that
his excited companion was in earnest.

"It was a fearful moment, Plum, and we should be thankful that we came out
alive. I think we have learned the raiders a lesson they won't forget. It
will be best to try and get your prisoners to Resaca."

It would not do to stop the train or even check its speed, as the
prisoners would be sure to take advantage of the situation. Thus Jack was
obliged to keep a sharp lookout and crowd the old engine on as fast as he
could with any degree of safety.

No further adventure befalling them, Jack and Plum at last had the
satisfaction of reaching Resaca. Never was there greater surprise in town
than when this train came into the station and the true situation became
known.

Officers were called to take charge of the prisoners in the car, but as
nothing could be proved against them, except what Jack and Plum stated,
and as their evidence was immediately discredited, the whole party went
free, vowing vengeance against their captors.

Jack saw that, on account of their being foreigners, they had really lost
favor by the capture, and he was glad to get clear so easily. After this
they ran a week without interference, not a solitary bush-raider having
been seen. Evidently the survivors had learned a lesson not to be quickly
forgotten.

Of course our hero and Plum received a few praises for their success in
getting the train through as they had, but it was evident to both that
they could not get full credit for whatever they might do. In fact it was
difficult for them to get acknowledgment for doing an ordinary duty.

This was due to the fact that they were foreigners and looked upon with
suspicion, no matter what they did.

Jack was not therefore much surprised when one day, as he was stepping
upon his engine at St. Resa, to have a bright-buttoned official stop him
and motion for another man to take charge of the locomotive.

This new arrival was a Peruvian, and the boy engineer was not long in
learning that he was willing to work for twelve pistoles a month.  Though
smarting under this unfair treatment, Jack offered no objections as he
stepped aside. The war with Chili was assuming more alarming proportions,
and he foresaw that troublesome times were near at hand.

Plum Plucky, upon finding that he was going to have a new master, jumped
down from the cab, exclaiming:

"You can't have my valuable services if you turn off Jack North!"

This was a turn in affairs the officials had not looked for, but the boys
did not stop to listen to their protestations.

Later they learned that the train did not make a run that day.




Chapter XV

The Treasure Island



"Now," said Plum, as soon as he joined his friend, "I call that about the
meanest trick I ever see played on a feller. Of course I wasn't going to
stay to fire for that weazen-faced son of old Piz-arro."

"It seems too bad you should lose your job on my account, Plum.
Particularly when I am more than half glad to lose mine, while you have
made a real sacrifice."

"Oh, carrots! I ain't any worse off than I was before. But what are you
going to do, Jack?"

"I am going to speculating."

"What!" in amazement.

"Speculating, Plum. I have been thinking several days of a scheme in which
I believe there is more money than in running an engine for bush-raiders
to run down."

"I'll bet you're going to speculate in that dirt I put round the don's
plants."

"You got it right the first time, Plum. I--"

"Ginger! going to raise coffee? 'Cause of you air I can give you a
pointer."

"No; you are on the wrong track now. But I have no objection to telling
you. Ever since I saw the result of your experiment I have been thinking
that the stuff would sell like hot cakes in our own country, in places
where the land is worn out and needs some such a stimulant. At any rate I
am going to send home a cargo and see what comes of it."

"Hooray! I see it all now. It may pay, but I doubt it. How air you going
to get the stuff there?"

"In the first place I have got to get possession of the article itself,
though I do not believe this will be a very expensive undertaking. I have
a few dollars I have saved up from my wages, and I think I can borrow some
somewhere. I am going to buy one of the nitrate tracts as soon as I can
get suited."

"You can buy a big mine for a hundred dollars, 'cause they're looked on
with disfavor. But after you've bought one, what then?"

"I am going to team a cargo to the nearest port and then charter a ship to
take it home."

"You're smart enough to be a general, Jack North," and having paid him the
highest compliment that he could, according to his estimate, Plum added:

"Say, Jack, I want to drive the team for you."

"You shall. But, as I am anxious to begin operations, I am going to look
for my first purchase."

"Don de Estuaray is the man you want to see. There is a big bed on his
estancia."

"It seems to me your experiment may have opened his eyes.

"He may catch onto my scheme quicker than some one who has seen nothing of
what this nitrate will do."

"Of course you're right and I'm a blockhead, as usual. But go ahead and
I'll tag at your heels like a dog."

Jack's first move was to get a couple of ponies for himself and Plum to
ride. Then the pair, with provisions enough to last several days, set out
on their quest.

Taking the direction of what he believed to be the heart of the nitrate
region, Jack in a couple of days found several beds which he felt would
prove rich fields of speculation.

His prime object was to find a bed which should not be too far removed
from the railroad, or at least where its product could be the easiest
teamed.

It was during his search one day that he got separated from his companion,
in his desire to explore a wider stretch of country, when he quite
unexpectedly found himself in the vicinity of his adventure with the
jaguars.

The memory of that encounter brought back to his mind the lonely pimento
he had seen in the valley on the opposite side of the hilly range, and the
story of the hidden treasure filled his thoughts.

"If I could only find that now how it would help me to carry on my
speculations."

Determined to look again on the spot, he climbed the ascent, until for a
second time he stood on the height.

Before he had reached this elevated position he had heard a deep rumbling
sound in the distance--a sound which seemed like the whirl and rush of
angry waters, as if he was approaching a high cataract.

Ere he had gained the extreme top of the elevation, however, this noise
suddenly died away, and the calmness of the primeval wilderness lay on the
scene as he paused on the summit to gaze into the valley.

Naturally his gaze had turned in that direction, and an exclamation of
astonishment left his lips, as he saw that the valley was gone!

The great basin was filled with water, the high hills and mountains
forming a mighty rim with a piece of the huge bowl broken away where the
gap existed in the elevated range on the north. But another feature of
this inland lake had greater interest for him.

Near its centre was a small, barren island, entirely destitute of growth
except for a solitary tree standing on its highest point.

The lonely monarch stood stark and stern in all its solitude, with one
branch lifted like a skeleton arm pointing toward the north.

"The pimento--the treasure island!" exclaimed Jack with suppressed
emotion.

The longer he looked upon the little island and its surroundings the more
fully convinced he became that it was the spot described in the paper he
had found so singularly on Robinson Crusoe's island.

When he had recovered somewhat from his glad surprise he urged the pony
down the rough descent until the shore of the lake was reached.

"Oh, Don!" he said to the faithful pony, "you must take me to the island,"
never dreaming of the effort it would cost.

As he spoke a commotion began in the water at the north end, though that
in front of him was still as unruffled as ever. But the pony had barely
plunged into the tide before a deep, guttural sound came up from the
depths and long lines of foam appeared on the surface.

Nothing daunted by this, Jack continued to urge the animal ahead in spite
of its desire to turn back, until they were about midway between the bank
which they had left and the island.

The strange noise had increased so that now it completely filled Jack's
ears, while the water was in a fearful state of agitation. It had taken on
a peculiar greenish hue, with big flecks of white foam, and here and there
were fountains spouting up bright yellow liquid, which rose to the height
of from ten to twenty feet.

The youth felt a strong undercurrent, and, finding that he could not reach
the island, he tried to get back to the shore he had left.

By this time the pony was struggling helplessly in the mysterious power
sucking it downward.

Then, before Jack could clear his feet from the stirrups, so as to look
out for himself, he was drawn under the seething waters with his horse!




Chapter XVI

At the Boiling Lake



As Jack felt the swirling waters closing over him, he made greater effort
to keep on the surface.

His gallant pony was struggling furiously for the same purpose, but the
power pulling them down was irresistible.

A continual roaring filled his ears, and it seemed as if he was being
drawn into some infernal region.

In spite of all he could do he was carried downward, until suddenly he
felt a terrible shock, as if he had been hurled against some stony
surface, and the next he knew he was floating on the water near the north
end of the lake, which was then quite tranquil. He had no difficulty in
swimming to the nearest point of land.

Scrambling up the precipitous bank he was glad to sink upon the ground for
rest.

He was wondering if his pony had perished, when he was gladdened by the
sight of the animal on the opposite side of the lake.

Before going to the horse Jack resolved to try to swim out to the island,
and as the water had now assumed the calmness which had prevailed at the
time he had first seen it, he did not think of further trouble. He had
received some bruises from his recent experience, but beyond them he felt
little the worse for his adventure.

Removing his outer garments, so as to give greater freedom to his
movements, he stepped down to the edge of the dark flood, which was filled
with the fine particles of earth it had swallowed.

As calm as the water was then, he had barely touched it with one foot
before a shriek, which rang in his ears for a long time afterwards, rang
high and far, cut short in its midst by a fearful rush of the aroused
flood, and a column was suddenly thrown into the air to the height of a
hundred feet!

It was such a terrific, appalling outburst that he hastily clambered back
upon the bank, to watch the strange sight. For fully two minutes the
waterspout quivered and vibrated in the air, when it collapsed as abruptly
as it had appeared.

The water of the lake continued to boil for five minutes, when it began to
subside, though bearing traces of agitation for five minutes longer,
during which Jack watched it with intense interest.

Still undaunted by this marvelous display, Jack resolved to try a third
time to reach the island, selecting a more favorable place for his descent
into the water this time.

As no outbreak had immediately followed his entrance into the lake this
time, he was beginning to think that the strange phenomenon was over. But
he was soon to be undeceived.

All at once, without warning, a dozen columns of water sprang upward,
threatening for a moment to drain the lake dry, and among these rushing,
writhing pillars Jack was borne into the air.

When the powers subsided he fell back with such a force as to render him
almost senseless. The lake was still churned and convulsed by the mighty
agency controlling it, and he had a hard fight to reach the shore, where
he lay completely exhausted.

Slowly recovering his strength he finally sat up and began to wring the
water out of his clothes, deciding to leave the place as soon as he felt
able. The water was calm then; though a short time before it had been
tossed and whipped into fury by the mysterious element controlling it.

"Were the whole Incas treasure buried on that island it would be safe from
the hand of the despoiler," he said, speaking aloud his thoughts. "But I
do not understand it. I am willing to wager that this is the same valley I
saw when I was this way before, though it was as dry as a palm leaf then.
How calm it is now, but I suppose if I should dare to enter its sacred
precinct it would begin again its fearful convulsions."

As he finished speaking, Jack picked up a small stone and tossed it into
the lake. No sooner had it disappeared beneath its dark surface than
another column of water shot upward with a sort of hissing that was
terrific, and in a moment the whole body was once more undergoing a series
of spasms frightful to behold.

Watching it until the outbreak was over, Jack lost no further time in
seeking the pony. Then he began to climb the hillside leading from the
place.

Upon the crest he paused for a last look, saying:

"It is calm enough now. Sometime I will come again, for I will know its
secret if I die for it. There is and must be a natural explanation for all
this."

Finding Plum Plucky waiting anxiously for him at the expected place of
meeting, Jack led the way toward civilization, having come to the
conclusion to close the trade on one of the nitrate beds he had seen and
begin operations as soon as possible.

He said nothing to his companion of his experience in the valley of
mystery, partly because the stirring scenes immediately following caused
him to put it in the background of his memory for a while.

He was the more anxious to get his first cargo of nitrate off as the war
cloud was deepening fast, and not only was Peru and Chili at a state of
bitter antagonism, but Bolivia was threatening to mix in the trouble. A
three-cornered war, with Southern Peru for its battleground, was anything
but what he desired to see.

The next day he bought his first nitrate bed, paying for it forty
pistoles, which was considerably more than he had expected, but it was
large, and if his plans only worked he believed there was a small fortune
in it.

He then hired oxen enough to make two six-ox teams, with suitable wagons
to draw the nitrate on, and he engaged the services of half a dozen
Peruvians to help in the work of getting out the first loads.

As the bed lay remote from the few beaten paths of the thinly populated
country, it would involve considerable hard work and time to get passable
roads cut through, so as to be able to draw loads of any size.

"By gosh!" drawled Plum Plucky, as they set out on their work, "I'm going
to stand by yeou; but yeou may hang my hat on a scare-crow if I don't
think yeou'll blow yerself dry."

"By that I suppose you mean that I shall lose all I am putting into my
venture," said Jack, good-naturedly.

"That's just what I mean. I'll bet yeou have got about every dollar yeou
have into it now."

"I have figured up that I shall have about twenty pounds left when I have
paid off my help."

"Say, Jack! I'd like to be there when you get in with yer first load of
dirt and see 'em laugh. Don't s'pose yeou have any dirt in the teown yeou
come from."

"Not dirt that is pure nitrate of soda, and possessing the highest
qualities for fertilization of any known compound. Hello! what is up now?"




Chapter XVII

In the Nitrate Fields



The last exclamation was called from Jack by the fact that the teams had
suddenly stopped, and the native drivers were shouting excitedly over
something which had happened.

They were at the time trying to make a roadway to the nitrate bed through
a trackless wilderness, and had thus far progressed with greater ease than
the young speculator had calculated.

But upon reaching the spot where the teamsters and workmen were holding an
excited controversy, Jack found that the cause of the excitement was the
fact that the way had been stopped by a sharp, rocky ridge, which extended
for miles in both directions.

"We can't go any further, señor," declared the head driver. "No team can
find its way through these rocks and up and down the hill."

Jack had seen this place when making his survey and had calculated upon
the difficulty in passing it, having the route most feasible at this
point.

"Let two men come forward with axes to clear away the stunted growth, and
the rest get their levers. I will show you by to-morrow it can be passed."

Lively work followed, the men taking hold with a vim, so that by noon the
next day a path had been cleared, so the teams could cross the rocky
ridge.

The balance of the distance to the mine was very favorable and at last
Jack had the satisfaction of finding himself at his destination, when the
men were set to work loading the carts, the oxen getting a chance to rest
while it was being done.

While superintending the work Jack had time to realize more fully than
before the gigantic undertaking he had upon hand. It is true the worst
seemed over, now that the path was cleared, but he knew with the rude
implements he had to work with that this had been poorly done, and that
the loaded teams would have difficult work to reach the open country. Even
then he would be many miles from the nearest seaport, where he was likely
to meet with another obstacle in finding a ship to transport his cargo to
the United States. Then, after he had reached home, how would he be
treated? A failure to sell his nitrate meant the loss of every penny of
money he had worked so hard to earn. But these anxious thoughts did not
rob him of his confidence in his ultimate success. Now he had put his
shoulder to the wheel, he was not one to look back.

When the hour came for him to give the order to hitch up the cattle and
prepare for the return journey, he gave his orders in a cheery tone.

"I tell you, Jack," said Plum, speaking with less drawl than common, "I'm
mighty glad to do this. I don't see how you can be so chipper, for I'm
dead sure we're going to have loads of trouble before we get out of this."

"No great thing was ever done without having more or less trouble at the
outset," replied Jack. "As soon as we get started we shall find it easier.
Hi, there, Pedro!" addressing one of the Peruvian drivers, "you have those
oxen yoked wrong. You ought to know better by this time."

"Who knows best, señor, you or I?" demanded the Peruvian, showing anger at
what he deemed an unwarranted interference.

Jack said nothing further, feeling that he had spoken too sharply perhaps,
though he knew he was in the right. He had found the natives anything but
pleasant men to deal with, and the quarrel of one was sure to be taken up
by his companions.

Five minutes later the foremost team was leaving the nitrate bed, starting
on its long journey at the slow pace of oxen, while the other soon
followed.

Vague reports had reached Jack before he had left on his trip, of the
uprising of the people, and of the guerrilla warfare being carried on by
the straggling armies of the North and South. Still he did not think he
would be molested, and he felt in good spirits, as they followed the rough
pathway.

To be on his guard as much as possible, however, he had thought best to
keep a short distance ahead of the teams, while Plum Plucky followed about
the same distance behind, the two thus maintaining a continual watch over
the train.

Nothing occurred to delay their progress, until Jack found himself
climbing the steep upgrade, which the Peruvians had declared impassable
before they had done so much work in clearing it. The course was uneven
now, and considerable of the way it was little more than a scratch on the
mountain side, with a sheer descent on one side of hundreds of feet.

He had got about half way toward the top when the loud cries of the
teamsters caused him to look back.

A glance showed him that the foremost team was "hung up" at a particularly
bad place.

The drivers were belaboring the patient oxen unmercifully, but not another
inch could they make the animals pull the load.

Shouting to the men to stop their useless goading of the oxen, our hero
ran back to the spot, finding that the second team had stopped a short
distance below, where it was comfortably waiting for the other to move
ahead so it could resume its tedious journey.

As there was no chance to get the oxen on the lower team past the upper
one, so as to be hitched on to help, on account of the narrowness of the
road, Jack quickly dismissed such an idea from his thoughts.

Not wishing to throw off a part of the load, which must be lost by so
doing, he stepped alongside the cattle and began to stroke them and to
speak gently to them.

"Both teams couldn't pull the load up this path, señor," said one of the
drivers.

"I am sorry I did not think to double up at the foot of the ascent, but it
is too late to complain now. Come, boys! all together."

Jack had taken the long, slender pole, with its ten feet of lash, with
which the drivers urged on their patient teams, and swinging the unwieldly
instrument over their heads as he uttered the words, he hoped to make them
start.

The result was most unexpected.

Putting their shoulders to the work with renewed life, the obedient oxen
fairly touched the ground with their bodies as they tugged ahead with
their burden.

The cart creaked and the axles groaned, while the heavy wheels began to
revolve.

"Hooray! it is mov--"

Plum Plucky gave expression to the exultant cry, but he did not have time
to finish before a loud snap was heard, and the oxen were seen to suddenly
plunge up the grade, leaving the cart!

"The pull pin has broken!" cried one of the Peruvians, terrified.

"The clevis has broke--look out!" yelled Plum, turning pale. "The other
team will be smashed!"

The heavily loaded wagon, freed suddenly from the power which had pulled
it to this precarious position, stood for a moment as if balanced on the
pinacle.

Of course Jack had seen what was taking place with a quicker eye than any
of his companions, and as he saw the wagon trembling in the balance for a
moment before it started on its downward course to destruction, and
realizing that a timely action could yet save it, he rushed forward to
seize hold of one of the wheels, shouting to his assistants:

"Quick--put your shoulder to the wheel and we may save it!"

Plum did spring forward to help his friend, but even he was too late to be
of any avail, while the Peruvians stood idle, without offering to move.

While the united strength of all might have stopped the wagon, Jack's
resistance was futile, and in a moment the loaded vehicle started on its
downward course, soon gaining a momentum that nothing could stop.

Faster and faster it moved, the wheels creaking and groaning unanimously,
as it gained in speed.

The drivers of the other team in the pathway below uttered wild cries of
terror, as they saw their danger, and began to scramble helter-skelter up
the mountain side.

The runaway was going directly upon them, but they were likely to escape.

Not so with the oxen and wagon, which seemed surely doomed.

Jack saw at a glance his whole work going to naught in a moment's time.

Then his presence of mind returned to him and he thought he saw a way to
avert a part of the loss.

Bounding down the pathway after the runaway, he soon managed to catch hold
of the tongue, which was dodging swiftly from one side to the other of the
path, according as it was swung to and fro by the motion of the forward
wheels.

Grasping this forearm with all the strength he possessed, Jack swung it
toward the near side, until locking the forward wheel on that side against
the sill of the cart.

He had seen that the only chance to save the rear wagon was at the
sacrifice of the other, and no sooner had he begun to hold the pole in
that position that the wagon began to turn toward the gulf yawning on that
side of the track.

It was a fearful alternative, but the best he could do, and Jack breathed
a sigh of relief as he found the hind wheels going over the brink of the
chasm.

For a moment the big load stood quivering on the edge of the precipice,
and then, with a crash which sounded far up and down the rugged valley,
the wagon went headlong to its doom.




Chapter XVIII

An Alarm of Fire



Breathless and exhausted by his almost superhuman effort, Jack sank down
upon the hard rocks, where he had stood at the fateful moment.

Plum Plucky, further up the broken pathway, stood in silent awe, while the
Peruvians looked on from their perches on the mountain side with bulging
eyes and chattering teeth.

The only creatures which seemed unconcerned were the oxen which had been
so narrowly threatened, as they quietly chewed their cuds, while they
blinked their big, soft-lighted eyes.  Plum was the first to speak.

"Jiminey whack, Jack! but you've done it."

"It was my only chance to save the oxen and the other load," said Jack,
rising to feet. "Better save half a loaf than to lose it all, you know.
Simply couldn't turn it into the rocks."

"But I don't see how you could think of it. I was scart, I ain't ashamed
to own. I'll bet that other is smashed into kindling wood."

Jack was already looking over the precipice after the lost wagon, saying
in a minute or so:

"It has come out better than I should have expected, though it will do us
no further good. It has lodged among some trees and rocks, and I do not
believe a wheel has been broken."

"That's so, Jack, though I reckon it don't make any difference to us. But
if 'em rocks don't start to grow it's 'cause the nitrate ain't any good,
for the stuff is sowed all over the Andes."

"It is pretty well scattered, that is a fact. But come, boys, we must
hitch on the other oxen, and see if the double team can pull this load to
the top."

Though the loss of one of his wagons and a portion of his nitrate, which
had cost him so much to get so far, was felt keenly by Jack, he showed his
indomitable will by immediately giving his attention toward carrying out
the work of crossing the ridge.

The remaining load proved an easy burden for the united teams, and in a
few minutes the heavy wagon was moving slowly up the path, the loud
commands of the Peruvian drivers echoing up and down the valley with
somewhat startling effect.

"As soon as we get to the summit," said Jack to Plum, "you and I will go
back and see if there is not some way to save the other wagon, even at the
sacrifice of its load."

"I s'pose we might throw off what nitrate there is left on it, and by
hitching together all the chains and ropes we have--"

"I wonder what is wrong now," exclaimed Jack, for the team had again
stopped, though the wagon was not more than its length from the summit. To
the drivers he shouted:

"Drive up a little further, so the wagon will stand without--"

Loud, angry cries stopped him in the midst of his speech.

Anxious to know what had caused another interruption in the advance, he
hurried forward, to meet a most unexpected sight.

Drawn up in front of the team in the narrow path was a squad of Chilian
soldiers, or bushwhackers, more properly speaking, for he knew they did
not belong to the regular army.

The Peruvians were cowering by the side of the wagon and cattle, muttering
over something in their native tongue which our hero did not understand.

"Ho, there, soldiers!" he called out, in his best Spanish, "what does this
mean?"

"It means if you don't get out of our path, Americanos, we will hew you
down!"

"Don't be too fast, señor captain," Jack made bold to say, "this path is
one of my own making, though if you will allow me to get my team to the--"

"Pitiful dog!" cried the Chilian, "Captain de Costa commands you to clear
his way without any insulting words."

Jack saw that it would be worse than useless to have any words with this
imperious Chilian, who in his petty command felt more arrogant than a king
on this throne. Accordingly he began in a respectful tone:

"If Captain de Costa will kindly allow us to drive to the summit we shall
be able--"

"Americano dog! will you surrender?"

By this time the Peruvians had taken to their heels, and Jack and Plum
stood alone in front of the pompous captain and legion.

Jack's first thought was to boldly refuse the demand, knowing the other
had no business to interfere with him, and to make such a resistance as he
and his companion could. But single-handed, against such odds, he knew it
would be folly.

"If you please, Captain de Costa, we two are but peaceful American boys,
both of us engaged--"

"Will you surrender?" thundered the Chilian, advancing with uplifted
sword, as if he would carry out his threat of hewing him down.

"We are offering no resistance to you, señor captain. If you will allow us
to--"

At a motion from the Chilian leader his soldiers leaped forward, and Jack
and Plum were quickly made prisoners.

The order was then given for the lads to be intrusted to a portion of
troops under the command of a sergeant, and then the march down the
pathway toward the nearest town was begun.

The last Jack saw of his team it was still standing just over the brow of
the height, the patient oxen chewing their cuds as unconcerned as if the
fortunes and the lives of their owners were not in the least endangered.

"What is going to be the end of this?" asked Plum, as they were marched
along side by side.

"It is impossible to tell. I do not think it will be best for us to have
much to say to each other if we wish to keep together. We must keep our
eyes open for a chance to escape."

Plum taking the hint, the friends walked along in silence until the
journey seemed without end.

The soldiers kept up a continual run of conversation, Jack catching enough
to know that the Chilian forces were gaining successes wherever they met
the Peruvians. He also learned that the army of Bolivia was now their
greatest concern, and that the latter was then on a march over the Andes
to meet them.

At nightfall a halt was made under a spur of the mountains, but before the
sun had tipped with gold the crest of the distant Andes the weary journey
was resumed.

That day about noon they came in sight of a little up-country town, which
the prisoners soon learned was known as Santa Rosilla. Its long, narrow
streets bore a deserted appearance, save for the motley-coated soldiers
passing to and fro, as if on guard.

The town bore every sign of a recent siege, while the indications were as
strong that the inhabitants had been completely routed and killed or
driven back into the mountains by their conquerors.

Straight down the grand plaza marched the soldiers with their captives,
making their way toward the casa consistorial, or town house, above which
flapped in the sleepy breeze the flag of Chili.

The door of the town house, which bore the marks of many bullets, was off
its hinges, but the rooms within were secure enough for all prisoners of
war that might fall into their hands in that isolated district, and
thither our twain were marched.

To their delight, which they were careful to conceal, they were put into a
room together, though under a strong guard.

"Looks so we were in for it," said Plum, after they had been left by
themselves for an hour or more.

"It was a hard set-back to my plans," said Jack.

"I wonder what they will do with us," ventured Plum, expressing the
thought uppermost in our hero's mind.

"From what I have overheard I should judge we were likely to be shot at
the first opportunity."

"'Pears to me you're mighty cool about it. Will they dare to shoot us? We
are not mixed up in their war, and it might make trouble for them in in
the end, if I know anything."

"They don't stop to consider that. It is my opinion they would dare to do
anything but meet an equal number of the enemy. It looks bad for us,
Plum."

"I wonder if we can't dig out of here somehow? These walls don't seem so
awful thick."

"Of course we must try and get out of this. The first thing to do will be
to free our limbs. Can you loosen your bonds any?"

For the next ten minutes the boys were busy trying to free their hands
from the ligatures which had been fastened in no uncertain way.

"It's no use," acknowledged Plum at last. "I believe mine grow tighter and
tighter. Hark! I should think that soldier on guard in the hall would get
tired of that everlasting tramping back and forth. I've a mind to tell him
to stop."

"Better not do it. I wonder if by standing on my shoulder you could look
out of that window up there?"

"I have been thinking that same thing. Let's try it."

Naturally their attention had been attracted to a small window, which
afforded light and ventilation for the room, but which was about ten feet
from the floor.

Tied hands and feet, as they were, the boys tried many times to carry out
their plan without avail, until it must have been near midnight when Plum
said:

"It's mighty aggravating. There must be lights on the streets, for I've
seen their flash."

"Let's try once more. If I lie down perhaps you can get on my neck, after
which I believe I can raise you to the window."

This proved a most difficult feat, but after repeated attempts Plum
succeeded in gaining the desired position, when Jack slowly straightened
up, until he had brought his companion's head on a level with the window,
where by leaning against the wall he was enabled to hold him for a hasty
look over the scene without.

Plum had barely gained his unsteady perch before he exclaimed in a tone of
excitement:

"Oh, Jack! the town is on fire! Everything is burning up!"

At that moment the dull boom of a cannon reached their ears.




Chapter XIX

Chilians on Both Sides



"Looks as if the old town was being raided by some enemy," declared Plum,
after a short pause, during which another peal of the distant cannon awoke
far and wide the dismal night.

Loud cries were now heard outside the town house, making the youths'
situation one of excitement. In the hall adjoining their prison the steady
tramp of the sentry's feet had suddenly ceased.

"How about the fire?" asked Jack, bracing himself more firmly against the
wall under the weight of his companion.

Boom! boom! boom! rang sullenly on the scene before Plum could reply, and
then the rattle of musketry succeeded and the hoarse shouts of men giving
orders such as no one could understand in the wild confusion.

"The fire lifts higher and higher," said Plum, as soon as a lull in the
tumult allowed him to be heard by his companion. "It seems to be burning
on the northeast corner of the town, and the wind is driving it down this
way like a race horse. The plaza is full of soldiers."

The cannonade soon became almost continual, and was fairly deafening.

"What will become of us?" asked Plum, showing his first sign of
hopelessness.

"Is the window large enough to let us crawl out if our hands were free?"
asked Jack.

"It may be; but it is crossed with bars of iron no man could break with
his hands."

"Take your last look and then come down."

Plum took a hurried survey of the scene which he realized he might never
look upon again, but his narrow orbit allowed of nothing more than what he
had described.

The cannons were still thundering forth their loud-voiced peals of war,
half drowned by the incessant rattle of the smaller arms in the hands of
the town's defenders.

In a moment Plum descended to the floor in a heap.

"Get on your feet if you can," said Jack a moment later.

By resting against the wall, as his companion was doing, Plum Plucky soon
stood beside him.

"I should like to know what we are to do in this condition. We are sure to
be killed."

"Hark! do you hear anything of the sentry now?"

"No; he went out to join the soldiers. I see him."

"Then our way is clear. Now, Plum, I want you to brace yourself as best
you can, and when I give the word throw all your weight against the door
with me."

"Going to try and break it down?"

"Yes; ready?"

"Ready."

"Now then, together!"

The old door shook and creaked beneath their combined efforts, but it
withstood the shock.

"Again--together!"

This time the whole building trembled, and the door creaked and groaned,
but still defied them.

"Still again--together!"

But the third attempt, nor yet the fourth nor fifth cleared their pathway,
though when both the boys were bruised from head to feet the rusty hinges
suddenly gave away and they went headlong into the narrow hallway.

Jack struck upon top, and he was the first to gain his knees, as near an
erect position as he could easily gain, and he began to crawl toward the
open air, saying:

"Follow me, Plum."

On the outer threshold they paused to take a hasty survey of the
surroundings, soon satisfying themselves that a terrific battle was being
waged at the upper end of the town.

"The quicker we get away the better," said Jack, begining to move
laboriously toward the grand plaza, with Plum close behind him.

In that slow, tedious way the two crossed the yard in front of the town
house, and then steering for the cover of a line of shrubbery bordering on
the west side of the plaza, they crawled as fast as they could in that
direction.

The sound of the cannon was not heard so constant now, but the storm of
the musketry had not seemed to cease to any extent.

What meant infinitely more to them, the firing was rapidly drawing nearer.
The fire, too, of the burning town was growing brighter and brighter, even
the plaza showing plainly under its vivid glare.

Upon reaching the shrubbery they stopped for a brief respite.

"Look, Jack!" exclaimed Plum, in a shrill whisper, "our prison is on fire!
We didn't get out any too soon."

Jack had made the same discovery. He made no reply, his thoughts being
busy in another direction.

An incendiary had kindled a fire at one end of the building and so fast
did the flames increase and spread that while they watched them they
sprang up and enveloped one whole side in a crimson sheet.

"We must get away from this place," said Jack. "The two factions of war
are coming this way on a run. It must be the captors of the town have met
more than their match this time."

Again the escaping couple began their slow retreat, now under cover of a
dense growth reaching they knew not how far. Nor did that matter so long
as it afford them shelter from their enemies.

Once, having gained a little summit from which they could look down on the
exciting scene, they stopped to gaze back, their curiosity aroused by the
wild medley of cries.

The town house was now all ablaze, the lurid fire feeding upon its walls
lighting far the night scene, while throwing a weird glamor over the
contending factions of war-crazed men, who had now both reached the
further side of the plaza and temporally suspended hostilities.

There was a reason for this last, too, as explained by Jack's words, as he
analyzed the situation:

"They are Chilians on both sides, Plum!"

"Do you mean, Jack, that this attack on the Chilians of the town has been
made by some of their own countrymen?"

"Yes; there has been some mistake made, which has cost many needless
lives. What a painful surprise it must be to them!"

Jack afterwards learned that he had been right in his conjectures, and
that through some unexplainable blunder one division of the Chilian army
had been sent to capture the town already in possession of another
portion.

Santa Rosilla was in the possession of the Chilians sure enough now!

But Jack and Plum dared not stop to see the outcome of this singular
meeting between the armed forces, but improved every moment to get away
from the ill-fated town.




Chapter XX

Preparations for Departure



Three days later, having actually worn off the bonds on their lower limbs
by their long, painful journey on their hands and knees through the dense
growth, until a friendly Peruvian lad finished their liberation, Jack and
Plum entered de la Pama, two sorry-looking youths but still full of
courage. Almost the first news they learned was that the St. Resa railroad
was again without the men to run the train, which had been stalled for
weeks. In fact, the engineer and his helper who had succeeded them, had
not made one complete trip, the fireman having blown out the boiler soon
after leaving De la Pama.

In this dilemma the officials hailed the appearance of the boys with
unfeigned delight. But Jack was sorry to learn that it had been decided
not to pay over thirty pistoles a month for his services.

"We might as well let the cars stand idle as to pay out all we can get for
help. Then, too, the business is not going to be very good while this war
lasts, señor."

The pay was still big for that country, and Jack resolved to accept,
though before doing so he asked: "What will you pay my fireman?"

"Twenty pistoles, señor. That is the best we can do. We can get plenty of
men for that price." "It doesn't look so. But what do you say, Plum? That
will bring you seventy-two dollars a month, if I reckon right. I will try
it for awhile if you will go with me."

"I'm with you."

Most unexpected to them at the time they began, the "awhile" proved for a
year. Jack had not dreamed he should stay so long, but his previous
experience had left him penniless, and with his fixed determination to try
again, he knew he would not be able to find so good an opportunity to earn
the needed money to begin renewed operations. During those days Jack sent
several letters to his folks and to Jenny. In return he received a letter
from his father, stating that all was now going fairly well with the
family and if he wanted to stay in South America he could do so. Mr. North
also sent the information that Fowler & Company had gone into the hands of
a receiver and there was no telling whether the business would be
continued or not, and Jack need not expect any back pay from the concern.

From Jenny Jack heard not a word, much to his anxiety and dismay. The fact
was that Jenny's folks had moved to another town and she had not received
Jack's letters, and consequently did not know exactly where he was.

"I suppose she has forgotten all about me," he thought, with a sigh.
"Well, I suppose I ought to go back, but I hate to do it before I've
managed to get some money together. There's a fortune in that nitrate and
I know it, and some day I'll get hold of it."

Very much to Jack's surprise they were not molested very much by the
bush-raiders, whose power seemed to have been checked by the advance of
the opposing armies, for the war was still carried on, though in a sort of
desultory manner, as if each side was afraid of the others. Jack could
foresee that the Chilians were pretty sure to secure that portion of the
country before they got through. Plum Plucky had stood by his friend all
of this time, and they had met with some thrilling experiences, but come
out of them safely.

Jack saved his money like a miser, and with undimmed faith in his ultimate
success bought five more nitrate beds, to be laughed at by his friend.

"Should think you would want to look after 'em loads you have got over on
the Andes," Plum would frequently say.

Each time Jack remained silent.

"Say, Jack," Plum would then invariably say, "don't yeou s'pose 'em oxen
are getting hungry by this time?"

Still the other held his peace.

Jack had not forgotten the mysterious island in the equally mysterious
lake amid the Andes, and twice during the year his memory had been
refreshed by startling accounts given of the place by different parties
that had visited the valley. These men had given it the name of the
"Devil's Waters," not very inappropriately.

At the end of the year, it now being certain that the Peruvians were
losing their hold on the province which comprised the territory in which
they were located, Jack said to his companion:

"I am almost sorry to say that I shall make my last trip to-morrow, Plum."

"Going back to nitrates?" asked the other, showing but little surprise.

"Yes. I must get a cargo to America as soon as possible."

"Should think you would want to. Guess I will stick to the old gal here a
little longer. When I have got enough money to get out of this swamp in
the way I want to I shall go back to old New England.

"I tell you there is no place like the Old Bay State. Yeou won't think me
a sneak for deserting yeou now, Jack?" dropping back into his old-time
nasal drawl.

"Oh, no, of course not. In fact, I think you are doing just as I should if
I were in your place. I will speak a good word for you to get my position
as engineer. You can run the engine as well as I now."

"Good for you, Jack. Now, how do you think of getting that stuff to the
States?"

"About the same way I tried first, only I shall not try to go behind that
spur of the Andes, as I did before.

"I can see my mistake now, though I believe that is the richest deposit I
have, and I shall sometime make something out of it. I am going to get a
cargo from the bed nearest to the railroad and get the company to freight
it for me to the seaboard."

"Then I shall see you occasionally, Jack."

"Oh, yes. I shall not be far away."

Jack was as good as his word, and the following day Plum Plucky proudly
took his place as engineer, with a new fireman to help him.

Jack then began to carry out his scheme of getting a cargo of nitrate to
his native land.

This time he obtained his supply of nitrate from a bed less than ten miles
from the railroad, drawing it to the station with ox teams. With his
better knowledge of the country he met with success in this part of the
undertaking, and then the train carried it to the sea-coast for him at
moderate rates.

Before this had been done he had bargained with a Peruvian captain of a
merchantman to carry the cargo to Philadelphia.

This had proved the most difficult part of his arrangements, for with the
existing war between the countries it was sometime before he could find a
man willing to do it.

But he found one at last and the nitrate was eventually loaded on the
vessel.

It was a proud, and yet an anxious, moment for Jack when he found
everything in readiness to leave the harbor.

The captain had declared his intention of setting sail under cover of
darkness, so as to escape an attack from a Chilian ship should one offer
to dispute his passage.

That afternoon Jack saw Plum to bid him goodbye, feeling sorry to part
with his honest friend.

The latter actually cried.

"Hang it, Jack! I've a mind to go with you. Think of me in this heathenish
country and you among friends and rolling in wealth."

"All but the wealth, Plum. But I shall be glad to have you go with me."

"I thank you, Jack, but I mustn't. I must stay here long enough to get the
money to pay up the mortgage on dad's farm, when I shall skip by the light
of the moon. You may not find me here when you come back, Jack, but I wish
you well."

A little after sunset the Peruvian ship moved slowly out of the harbor of
San Maceo, Jack watching the land as it receded from sight with a peculiar
interest, and his mind ran swiftly back over the eventful time he had
passed in that faraway land.

He had given the captain the last pistole he possessed, as he had been
obliged to pay him in advance to get him to undertake the task, so he was
again penniless. But he had no doubt he would have money enough as soon as
he could get home and dispose of his cargo. Over and again he had figured
out his profit, if it should prove saleable at the moderate price he had
fixed upon it. Is it a wonder his thoughts were in a tumult? Is it strange
that he found it difficult to make himself believe that at last after that
long waiting, he was really homeward bound?

"How glad they will be to see me!" he thought. "And Jenny! She will not be
expecting me. It has been so long since I left. Some of them may be--"

He was interrupted in his meditations by the report of a gun in the
distance, and, glancing to the port, he discovered a ship coming up
rapidly.

That there was something wrong in the appearance of the stranger was
evident from the bustle and excitement which had suddenly sprung up among
officers and crew, not one of whom spoke anything but Spanish.

All sail had been crowded on that the ship could possibly carry; but
heavily loaded and at best a poor sailer, the new-comer continued to
overhaul them at a startling rate.

Coming alongside of Jack finally, the captain said:

"We are lost, señor! I ought to lose my head for undertaking such a mad
project."

"It may not be as bad as you seem to think, señor capitan," replied Jack,
hoping to encourage the commander.

But all that he could say was in vain.

The Chilian warship, as the stranger really was, continued to keep up its
firing, though the Peruvian vessel had not fired a gun.

Jack anxiously watched the approach of their pursuer, feeling that his
fortune, if not his life, was at stake.

It is possible if the Peruvian had laid to and allowed the other to come
up without the show of running away, that it might have been permitted to
continue its course unmolested. And again it may not have been so.

At any rate the Peruvian captain held to his flight as his only hope of
salvation, until at last a shot, better directed than the random firing so
long kept up, struck the doomed merchantman fairly amidship.

The craft instantly lurched and trembled from bow to stern.

"She is sinking!" shrieked the captain. "Quick--to the boats!"



Chapter XXI

A Panic on Shipboard



A scene of the wildest description followed the frantic captain's
announcement and order. The sailors were panic stricken, and more than
half of them plunged headlong into the sea.

The captain was scarcely less distracted than his men, and he only added
to the helplessness of the situation by his words and actions.

Jack tried to pacify him by saying:

"Pardon me, señor capitan, but the ship will not sink at once if at all.
You have plenty of time in which to save your lives."

"But the Chilian! We shall be made prisoners of war. Heaven protect me! I
was a fool to listen to you, Señor North."

"It is too late to think of that now. It is your duty to see if something
cannot be done to stop the ship's leak."

It was useless to try to reason with the Peruvian captain. He was sure the
ship was going to sink, and seemed determined that she should.

Meanwhile the Chilian continued to draw nearer, though it had nearly
stopped firing.

The trumpet-like tone of the commander rang over the water just as the
terrified Peruvians lowered a boat and leaped headlong into it, that is,
those who had not previously jumped into the sea.

Finding himself alone on the sinking vessel, which was going down fast,
Jack answered the Chilian's challenge:

"Ship ahoy! what do you want?"

"What ship is that?"

"The merchant ship, _Santa Clara_, Señor Captain, now sinking from
the effects of your shot."

"Lay to and I'll come aboard."

This command was not obeyed.

The doomed vessel was now lurching fearfully, and Jack knew that he could
not leave it any too soon for his own safety of life. Fortunately the
shore was not so far away but he believed he could reach it, and throwing
off his outer garments, he leaped into the water.

The Peruvians were struggling in every direction, the boat having been
upset by them in their mad endeavors to save themselves. Jack knew that
the farther he got away from them and the quicker he did it, the better it
would be for him. He left them in their furious, but futile, efforts to
escape or drown, as their attempts for life deserved.

After swimming a short distance he looked back to find that he was just in
season to witness the fate of the ship. He saw her make a sudden lurch
forward, and then she seemed to right herself for a moment, but it was her
death struggle, for with the next breath she went downward, quickly
disappearing from sight forever.

"Another plan gone wrong," thought Jack, "and again I am where I began."

A less courageous youth than Jack North must have given up then, but with
the stern determination of his nature not to give up, he resumed his
swimming, reaching the land half an hour later.

"This is worse than before," he said ruefully, as he viewed his drenched
figure, "for I did save my coat then. Yes, and my cargo of nitrate is
still on the mountain waiting for me. I think I will toss up a cent to see
what I shall do next. No! come to think of it, I haven't got the cent to
do that!"

His first thought was to return to the machine shop in Tocopilla, but as
De la Pama was nearer he decided to go there in the morning. "It is
useless for me to remain here," he reasoned, "I wonder how many of the
Peruvians have escaped? They were a set of cowards anyway, and the captain
the biggest fool of them all. I hope he will make good use of my money."

Jack laid down supperless that night under the green blanket of a Peruvian
forest, and he went on toward De la Pama the next morning breakfastless,
thinking:

"There is one thing certain, I will not take Plum's job from him. If he
has no fireman, and will accept me, I will go as his helper."

Though he did not seek immediately his friend, almost the first person he
saw in town was Plum. It would be difficult to say which was the more
surprised.

"What! not gone to the States, Jack?"

"No, Plum."

"Something gone wrong, Jack, again?"

"About my usual luck, Plum. I am where I began--without a cent in my
pocket," and he quickly told the other what had befallen him since they
had parted.

"It's too bad, Jack, but I'll tell you what I'll do. I have what amounts
to three hundred dollars that I've saved and every dollar of it is yours
till you can pay it back."

"I could not think of taking your hard earnings, Plum, for it is uncertain
if I should ever be able to pay it back.

"I thank you from the bottom of my heart, but must look for work again."

"Then you shall have my job, Jack. I had rather fire anyway; honest,
Jack."

"Thank you again, Plum, and it's just like your generosity, but I cannot
rob you of your situation. How does your fireman do?"

"Tip-top, I am sorry to say. To tell the truth, Jack, he does so well I am
afraid he will get my job away from me. I wish you would take the lever
again, Jack, and let me fire. I never had so good a time in my life as I
did then."

This was a little past noon, and a few minutes later Jack would be obliged
to part with Plum, who must start on his return to St. Resa.

"There is one favor you can do me, Plum. If you will lend me money enough
to buy a pair of oxen I will begin to team a cargo of nitrate down myself.
I do not feel you will take much risk in letting me have that amount."

"I only wish you would take more, Jack."

"I think I have hit on a better plan this time," said Jack, as he took the
loan. "I am going to draw enough for a shipload down on the Bolivian coast
and house it there until an American ship comes into harbor.

"I may have to wait a long time, but it will be best in the end."

With his oldtime vivacity Jack set out on his new undertaking. He soon
found a yoke of oxen to his liking, and finding he had money enough he
bought a second pair. Then he started for the mountain ridge where he had
so unceremoniously left his two loads of nitrate so long before.

He did not expect to recover the one that had gone over the precipice,
though it had not moved from its singular position. To his joy he found
the other just where he had left it. The rust had gathered on the iron-work
and the sun had discolored the wood, but the wagon was in running order,
and as the path from this point was generally descending he had no trouble
in drawing the load, though his team consisted of one yoke of oxen less
than before.

It would be tedious to follow him in his long, lonely journeys to Cobija,
on the coast of Bolivia, where he stored his nitrate until he had there
enough for a ship's cargo. During the time his cattle lived by feeding on
the grass that grew on the more fertile places along the route, while he
lived on whatever food he could pick up, sleeping at night under his cart.

He had no further use for his oxen, so he sold them at the first favorable
opportunity, realizing enough for them to pay back the money he had
borrowed of his friend, with a fair rate of interest. Surely he had made a
more auspicious beginning this time.




Chapter XXII

The Fate of Plum Plucky



It had been three months since Jack had seen Plum, so he resolved to go to
De la Pama and see his friend before making another move in his venture.
But he had not left town before he was surprised to meet his friend, who
had come to Cobija in search of him.

"Lost my job and so I thought I would hunt you up," said the latter,
bluntly. "Got a stunning piece of news for you, too. There is an American
brig ship just above here at the next town, and I made bold to ask him to
take your cargo to New York. He says he will do it for a snip in the
profits."

This was a bit of news worth hearing, and in the exuberance of his
spirits, Jack flung his cap high into the air and threw his arms about the
neck of his friend.

"At last I believe my dream will be fulfilled, but I shall never forget it
was you who helped to accomplish it. But I want to pay the money I owe
you."

"Not yet, Jack; better keep it awhile longer. I know it is safe. You may
need it you know. Besides I am going to the States with you. I have got
enough of this country. The war grows hotter and hotter up St. Resa way. I
am homesick!"

Jack lost no time in seeing the captain of the brig, a man named
Hillgrove, and who gave our hero a most cordial greeting. He had been in
Bouton daring his adventurous career, though he could give Jack no
information of his friends. He knew John Fowler, the great engine builder,
and that simple fact gave him confidence in the young speculator, who must
have presented a not very favorable appearance to him.

Jack's long exposure to the tropical sun had fairly blackened his
countenance, his hair was long and unkempt, while his clothes were sadly
in need of repair, or more truthfully new ones to take their place. But
there was an honest frankness in his manner, and Captain Hillgrove entered
into the spirit of the venture with a hearty good-will. The bluff old sea
dog, too, true to his nature, was anxious to get out to sea again as soon
as possible.

"I must and will get out of this infernal country within a week," he said.
"So I will run down to Cobija as soon as possible, and if your nitrates is
on board by that time the old _Elizabeth_ will be good-natured."

Plum having decided to go home with Jack, it was necessary for him to
return to De la Pama for his money.

"I will be back sure, Jack, on the third, if not before," were his parting
words.

Captain Hillgrove ran into Cobija the next morning, when the loading of
the nitrates was begun with as little delay as possible, Jack feeling in
the best of spirits as he superintended the work.

But on the eve of the third day, Jack having got the last of the cargo
aboard a little after noon, to his anxiety, Plum Plucky had not appeared.

"He will surely come before morning, unless something has happened to him,
for I never knew Plum to break his word," said Jack to the skipper.

"Can't wait any longer!" declared captain Hillgrove the following morning,
when it was found that Plum was still missing. "We shall all be
confiscated by these infernal Spaniards."

Jack was now really alarmed about his friend, whom he believed had been
waylaid and robbed. But he could not think of leaving without making a
search for him.

"I am going to start for De la Pama to look for him, but you may expect me
back by sunset."

"If you are not I shall set sail without you, for I have seen some of the
Chilian spies around today."

"You need not wait any longer than sunset," said Jack, who could not blame
the other for his impatience.

Losing no more time, Jack mounted a fleet pony that he had hired at an
exorbitant price, and set out for De la Pama at a furious pace.

Toward noon he was gladdened by the sight of an inhabitant of the town
whom he knew, and who was on his way to Cobija.

Halting the Peruvian he inquired of him in regard to Plum. This fellow,
who knew Plum well, replied that he had seen him in town, and that he had
left two days before. Upon second thought, he volunteered the startling
information that news had come of an American being waylaid and killed by
a party of bush-raiders a dozen miles east of De la Pama!

"Did the young engineer start directly for Cobija?" asked Jack anxiously.

"No; he went toward the east, saying he wished to go to Don de Estuaray
before he went to Cobija."

This was sufficient to arouse the fears of Jack, who procured a fresh
horse and put on as rapidly as possible across the wild country toward the
estancia of Don de Estuaray.

All the afternoon he rode as fast as he could, but he saw nothing of his
missing friend. In his anxiety he halted on top of an eminence of land
commanding a wide view of the surrounding country, to scan the lonely
scene.

His attention was finally caught and held by the flight of one of those
enormous vultures of the Andes, which was descrying a circle in the air
directly over the valley at his feet. Smaller and smaller grew the orbit
of this dark bird while he watched, until suddenly it ended its gyrations
and swooped swiftly down out of sight.

Then a second took its place in the air, soon following it to the earth,
in turn succeeded by a third, and that by another, and so on, until a
dozen had come and gone in this mysterious way.

With a dread foreboding at his heart, Jack rode forward into the isolated
valley, when, from a small opening in the centre of the place the sudden
whir of wings and the rapid flight of many dark bodies told him the secret
of it all.

He found what he expected a moment later--the bones of a human being
picked clean of all flesh by the vultures, while scattered here and there
were shreds and pieces of the garments worn by the unfortunate person.

He found enough of the clothes to know only too well that they belonged to
his lost friend Plum Plucky, and tears filled his eyes as he turned away
to shut out the sad spectacle.

"This is fearful!" he murmured. "Poor, poor fellow!"

At this very moment, though of course unknown to him, tired of waiting for
him any longer, Captain Hillgrove was sailing out of Gobija harbor,
anxious to reach the open sea before night should set in.




Chapter XXIII

Jenny



The vultures were still screaming over his head, venting their rage over
being disturbed in their feast, as Jack hastily brushed the tears from his
eyes and looked more clearly around him.

"Poor Plum!" he exclaimed, "this is indeed a sad fate. It seems a certain
fatality for any one to be my friend. But I suppose you were killed for
your money. It seems only decent that I should give your bones human
burial."

With his knife and the stirrups taken from the trappings of his horse,
Jack hollowed out a spot to receive all that was left of the body he had
found.

By the time he had finished the sad task it was quite dark in the forest,
so he knew he must get away from the lonely place as soon as possible, if
he valued his own life.

With a last farewell look at the wildwood grave which he was never to see
again, he rode away through the wilderness.

He soon found, however, that his horse was so spent that it must have rest
before going much further.

As impatient as he was to reach Cobija, wondering what Captain Hillgrove
would think of his prolonged absence, he yielded to the unavoidable and
stopped awhile in the heart of the forest.

It was broad daylight when he rode into De la Pama on a used up horse and
himself quite fagged out.

But notwithstanding his condition, he felt obliged to push on for Cobija,
dreading lest he should find Captain Hillgrove already gone. Accordingly
remounting the pony he had previously ridden, he started for the sea coast
at a rapid gait.

The wiry little animal made a remarkable record, but he might as well have
been on the road another day, as it seemed, for he found his worst fears
realized.

Captain Hillgrove had sailed!

Whither should he turn now? What should he do? Never in his life had he
felt so lonely and so near despair as he did at that time. The indomitable
pluck which had carried him through so many trials began to leave him.
Then, he rallied, exclaiming:

"I will earn money enough to take me back to the United States on the
first ship that comes this way. Perhaps with a sample of my nitrate
I------"

He suddenly felt a heavy hand laid on his shoulder, and turning he was
both astonished and pleased to find one of the seaman of the
_Elizabeth_ standing beside him!

"Ahoy, shipmate!" greeted the sailor, giving the true nautical pitch, "so
I've follered you into port at last, though it's a sorry cruise I've had."

"Captain Hillgrove!" cried Jack, elated. "Where is he?"

"Outside, shipmate. He durstn't stay inside longer, and he sent me to keep
a lookout for you. I was giving you up when I clapped my old watchdogs on
you. You are ready to go out to the _Elizabeth_ in my boat?"

Jack's reply was an exclamation of joy and a more fervant grip of the
honest old tar's hand.

"Captain Hillgrove had not deserted me after all!"

Without further trouble or delay the couple made the trip to the waiting
vessel, when Jack was greeted by the bluff old skipper:

"Bless my eyes! but I had given you up to old Davy Jones."

"And I thought you had left me in the lurch," said Jack frankly, as he
cringed under the grip given his hand by the other.

"I did not dare stay in Cobija longer, my hearty. If I had done so nary a
bit of your dust would have been left on the _Elizabeth_. Bless my
eyes! but I'm just overflowing and roaring glad--run up the yards lads.
Lively, lads! put the old _Elizabeth_ on her wings. We must be a long
way from here afore sun-up."

Exciting scenes followed, of which Jack was a spectator and not an actor.
For the present his work was done, and he had time now to ponder upon his
ups and downs, hardly able to believe that at last he was really on his
homeward journey. He felt far more confident in the care of bluff Captain
Hillgrove than in that of the fickle Peruvians.

Nor was his confidence misplaced, for the night passed without anything
occurring to interrupt their progress, and when the sun rose the following
morning it found them many leagues from land, and bowling merrily on their
way.

Captain Hillgrove listened to his account of the fate of poor Plum Plucky
with a feeling of sorrow, though he had never met the young American.

Jack's return home was something of a triumph, though he was saddened by
the loss of his companion during those trying scenes he could not put from
his mind, while his longings to reach home were tinged with those
forebodings one cannot escape who has been away so long, and the nearer he
approached his native land the more ominous became those feelings!

Were his parents still living and well? Was--was Jenny still true to him?
What had she thought of his long, weary years of absence? Until then he
had not realized that he had been away so long.

At last the old _Elizabeth_ was safely moored at her dock.

Though Captain Hillgrove was anxious to know what the result of their
speculation was going to be, he allowed Jack time to hunt up his relatives
and friends before the nitrate was moved from the ship's hold.

I cannot begin to explain the joyous reception accorded our hero at his
home, for many had given him up as dead.

With a tremulous tongue he asked for Jenny dreading, doubting, expecting
he knew not what; and then his cup of happiness overflowed at the
thrice-welcome news of her well-being and faithfulness to him, and that
she had just returned to her native town.

Jenny was not only living and well, but she had never given up looking for
him, believing he would some day return to her.

The sweet happiness of the meeting between the pair is too sacred to be
revealed.

When the first transport of his reception home had passed, Jack proceeded
to put on the market his ship-load of nitrate, to be met with another
rebuff in the checkered wheel of fortune.

He could find no one with faith in the virtue of his product brought from
the wilds of South America.

Captain Hillgrove began to think he had made a profitless voyage, though
be it said to his credit, he stood ever by Jack.

The latter met the words of scorn uttered against him with his
characteristic good-nature. Some of the nitrate was put in the hands of
competent chemists, and still more with practical agriculturists.

"I shall win out," said Jack confidently.

"I trust so with all my heart," answered Jenny.

At last some favorable reports came in and then the load of nitrates was
sold at a fair profit. Of the amount Jack got several hundred dollars, the
rest going to the captain of the _Elizabeth_.




Chapter XXIV

Jack and the Ocelot



The one most satisfied with the result of this first cargo of nitrate was
Captain Hillgrove. He had not expected great returns, but found himself so
well paid that he was willing to return for another load as soon as
possible.

Jack felt confident of his ultimate success. Already he was the possessor
of a fair sum, and with the apparently unlimited deposits of nitrate now
in his possession, he believed he could easily secure a fortune. As soon
as he should get back to Peru he resolved to get possession of other
nitrate beds before the price should advance.

But with that far-seeing sagacity of his he made no talk of what he had
done or what he had in mind. Quietly he went about his work, engaging
several ships to go to South America with him, prepared to return with
loads of the precious substance. He fitted up an office at home and put a
trusty man in the place to begin to work up a business. He had fondly
looked forward to giving this place to Plum Plucky, but stern fate had
decreed different plans.

Jenny was enthusiastic over her Jack's plans, and that they might not be
separated so long again she consented to their marriage, which took place
before he started on his second trip to Peru, and she accompanied him.

Now that Jack had really got started in his speculations, he studied how
best he might promote his interest. His young wife going with him to South
America, he resolved to locate in that country until he had got fairly
under control the gigantic business he intended to build up.

While successful in his nitrate ventures, he still preserved the
manuscript he had picked up in the convict cell on the island of Robinson
Crusoe, and he looked forward to the time when he should be able to visit
the strange lake in the Andes with means to reach its mysterious island of
buried treasure.

So at last, accompanied by a party of surveyors and explorers, armed with
papers which would make him the owner of the whole region as soon as the
boundaries could be fixed, he started for the place.

He had told his real object to no one, knowing that to do so would be to
ruin his prospects without benefiting any one permanently.

He had no difficulty in leading the way to the spur of the Andes where he
had met with his thrilling experience with the jaguars, and then the party
started for the rocky ridge overlooking the niche in the mountains holding
the Devil's Waters.

It was a route that Jack had traveled several times, and feeling in the
best of spirits, he set off on a galop, on the pony he was riding.

"Poor Plum!" he murmured, as he rode along. "How I wish he was a live to
enjoy this with me."

On and on went our hero until he came to where there was a break in the
trail. He was absorbed in thought at the time and did not notice that his
pony turned to the left instead of the right.

The way seemed easy, and presently the pony set off on a galop, which soon
brought Jack out of his revery.

"Hullo! where am I going?" he asked himself, and brought his steed to a
halt. Then he gazed around in perplexity. "I declare I must be lost!"

With the memory of what had happened when he had been lost before, Jack
lost no time in turning back. But soon he became bewildered, and brought
his steed to a standstill a second time.

"What does this mean, Firefly?" he asked of the pony, but the animal could
not answer.

Jack heaved a sigh and then drew a pistol he carried.

"I'll fire a shot--that will attract the attention of the others," he
reasoned. "What a dunce I was to get lost! I surely make a fine leader!"
Throwing up the pistol he discharged it. Hardly had he done so when his
pony started to bolt. Away dashed the steed under some trees and then
through a mass of vines, and Jack was thrown to the ground, striking on
his head as he fell,--and then his senses forsook him.

How long he laid where he had fallen he did not know exactly but when he
came to his senses, it was to find darkness around him. There was no rain,
but heavy clouds filled the air and a heavy breeze filled the woods around
him.  He got up slowly, to make certain that no bones were broken, and
then looked around for his pony. The animal had disappeared and could not
be found. His pistol was also gone.

"Now I am surely in a pickle," reasoned Jack. "The question is, what am I
to do next?"

He knew his party must have gone on long before this. He would have to
find them in some way. But how?

Not relishing a stay in the bushes he started for higher ground. He had
not gone a dozen rods when he found himself at the edge of a ravine, lined
with tall trees and vines.

"I certainly did not come that way," he said to himself. "But beyond is
higher ground and I had better go up than down."

Thus reasoning, he looked around for some means of getting over the
ravine. A number of vines grew across, and he determined to test them and
if they were strong enough, to use them as a rope for getting across.

The vines appeared to be as firm as a cable, and without giving the matter
a second thought he launched himself forth and started to the other side
of the cut in the forest.

He had progressed less than two yards when he felt one end of the vines
giving way. He tried to turn back, but it was too late, and down he went.

Some heavy bushes broke his fall somewhat, but he continued to go down and
down, until with a dull thud he landed on a mass of soft dirt. He was
unharmed and soon arose to his feet, to gaze around in fresh dismay.

He had landed in an opening or cave, and presently went down into it still
further. Then, as he picked himself up, he heard a sudden low growl, that
filled him with fear. He strained his eyes and made out a small animal,
which proved to be the cub of an ocelot.

He followed its course to a litter of leaves and straining his glance in
that direction made out two other cubs.

They were too small to be dangerous. Plum had told him that there were
very few ocelots in that vicinity and these rather cowardly, unless
attacked or enraged.

Jack looked hurriedly around. The parent ocelot was not in evidence. The
baby cub he had stumbled over, however, was making a great outcry, and our
hero decided he would not linger any longer than was necessary.

He got under the hole he had fallen through. It was not accessible by
climbing, for the walls of the cave were perfectly perpendicular and came
nowhere near the central aperture.

Jack reached up and caught at the dangling end of the broken vine. It
sustained one hard pull, but, as he set his full weight, it tore up roots
and all, bringing down a shower of dirt and gravel.

About eight feet over his head the youth made out an exposed root of the
tree. It ran out of the solid dirt a few inches, looped, and was again
solidly imbedded.

If he could reach this, he could grasp higher pieces of roots that showed
plainly, and easily draw himself to _terra firma_.

Our hero went back to the extreme end of the cave. The young cubs set up
outcries of affright as he passed near them, but he paid no attention to
them.

He braced for a run and a jump to reach the piece of root that was the
bottom rung of a natural ladder to liberty.

Poised on one foot, Jack stood motionless in some dismay. The entrance to
the cave was suddenly darkened. A great heavy body dropped through. The
mother ocelot landed on four feet on the cave floor with a terrific growl.

She ran first to her crying cubs, nosed them affectionately, and then
turned with low, ominous growlings.

Jack saw the beast's eyes fix themselves upon him. They glowed with fire
and fury. Its collar ruffled and its white teeth showed.

Jack had not so much as a stick to defend himself with. He had loaned his
hunting knife to a friend when they first started and his pistol had been
dropped in the woods.

In his pocket was a small pocket knife. He was groping for this when the
ocelot, that had for a minute or two stood perfectly motionless, made a
forward movement.

It was not a spring or a glide, but a rush. Jack knew why they called this
species the Honey Eater. Its paws were enormous and armed with long curved
sharp pointed claws.

He was hedged in. The beast, still advancing, reared on its hind feet.

Its forepaws were extended and whipping the air. Jack knew that one
contact would tear the bark from the toughest tree. He mechanically seized
the first object his groping fingers met in his coat pocket.

It was one of two condiment bottles that he had brought from the last
camp. This was the one containing pepper.

In a desperate sort of a way Jack discovered this. He tore off the top of
the bottle.

It was all that he could do to stay the course of the determined animal.

As the ocelot thrust out one formidable paw to tear its victim into its
clasp, Jack flung the contents of the pepper bottle squarely into its
eyes.




Chapter XXV

In the Quicksands



Jack ducked down and dodged the ocelot, and got past the animal. He could
do this now, for the whole contents of the pepper bottle had gone squarely
into the eyes of the beast.

The effect was indescribable. The animal gave a frightful roar, dropped to
the floor, and, rolling over and over, tore frantically with its paws at
its blinded, smarting eyes.

The cubs, excited and frightened by the uproar, joined in the chorus. They
waddled around, getting in our hero's way, and by their cries arousing the
mother from her own distress.

She got upright, and seemed to spot Jack. Her advance, however, was clumsy
and at fault, and the youth had time to get out of her way.

A second and a third rush she made at him. The last time one paw struck
Jack's coat sleeve and ripped it from place.

"This is getting serious," murmured the lad. "Each time she comes swifter
and surer. I must get out of here, now or never."

Jack drove the cubs to their litter, and poked them with his foot. They
set up a frantic uproar. This was just what he wanted. The mother flew
towards her offspring.

The moment that she did so, Jack glided to the opposite wall of the cave.

He made a sharp run for the opening overhead, calculated poise and
distance nicely, and landed with success.

He grabbed the rounding root. It held like iron, but his feet were
dangling, and as he swayed there the big ocelot brushed by them on the
hunt for the intruder.

Jack held firmly to the root and swung up his other hand. He caught at a
higher tree root. Now he had a double hold.

He knew that the ocelot might come after him even up there, and lost no
time in climbing from root to root. At last his head projected through the
mesh of verdure into clear daylight. Jack lifted himself to solid ground
and leaned against the tree trunk, out of breath and perspiring.

"That was action," he panted. "Will the beast come after me? No--but
something else may. Oh, the mischief!"

The roars and growlings down in the cave seemed to have attracted outside
attention. Jack turned sharply, at the sound of crackling branches and
rustling leaves at a densely-verdured spot near at hand.

There burst through the greenery a new enemy. This was an ocelot larger
than the one he had just escaped from.

"That is the head of the family, sure," thought Jack. "It's a race, now."

The new feature in the incident came straight for our hero, with bristling
muzzle and fiery eyes. Jack started down the edge of the ravine.

It crumbled so that he could not make very rapid progress. To turn aside
into the jungle meant to fight his way through thick, thorny bushes. To
leap down into the dry water-course was even worse. There, as he knew, the
spongy, shifting sand bottom would prevent even the progress of a decent
walk.

Jack glanced back over his shoulder. The big ocelot, more sure-footed than
himself, was following him up resolutely.

Jack took the first tree he came to. It was a dead one. There were lower
branches within reach, and he swung himself up to its first crotch
readily. The ocelot did not pause. It started up the tree without delay.
Jack armed himself with a piece of a thick limb. Reaching down, as the
beast got about four feet away, he delivered a smart whack directly across
its snout.

The animal issued a terrific snort. Its eyes blazed madly. A second blow
with the club brought the blood, but it kept on climbing.

Jack knew that it would be folly to tempt to battle at any closer
quarters. He stood on a dead limb about twenty feet from the ground.

The limb was as thick as his arm, and over thirty feet long. It ran clear
across the ravine, and a discovery of this fact gave Jack an idea.

He planned to go out to the far end of the limb, swing from its extremity
and drop to the ground, landing on the ether bank of the cut.

The ocelot could not get hold or balance to venture as far out on the limb
as the lad dared to go. Jack calculated that the time it lost in getting
down to the ground again, would enable him to meantime put a considerable
distance between himself and the enemy.

The lad sat astride the dead tree branch and began to walk himself outward
from the main trunk of the tree.

The ocelot reached the crotch, surveyed Jack with a savage growl, and
carefully planting its feet, started out after him.

Its progress was slow. Jack hitched himself along more rapidly. The branch
began to creak. Our hero doubted if it would sustain their double weight.
However, he trusted to the wary instinct of the ocelot, which kept coming
right forward. Jack was about eight feet from the end of the branch when
it gave a very ominous crack. In fact, he saw the white splinters show
where it joined the tree.

He swung both feet to one side of the limb, held on only by his fingers,
and planned to get to its end hand over hand.

Snap! Jack hurried progress, but it was no use. He saw the ocelot crouch
and hug the limb. It gave way at its base. Jack let go. He landed directly
on the smooth, sandy bottom of that portion of the ravine.

He struck the ground upright, squarely with both feet. Glancing quickly at
the tree, he saw that the branch had whipped right down against the trunk.

The limb had not entirely broken loose, but swayed from several sustaining
wood filaments. The ocelot, still hugging the limb, was clawing
frantically at the main trunk of the tree to get a new hold there to keep
from a tumble.

"It won't do to stop, I see that," murmured Jack. "Ugh! what kind of a
mushy mess have I got into?"

Jack looked down at his feet. They had sunk into the sand and were covered
to the ankles. With the greatest difficulty he pulled out one foot.

The instant he put it down again in a new spot, however, it sank afresh.
He released the other. This threw his weight on a single foot, which went
down half way to the knee.

It was not ten feet to the bank of the ravine. Jack lost all interest in
the ocelot as he thrilled at a startling discovery.

"Quicksand!" he breathed hastily. "There is not a moment to lose!"

Our hero tugged to get the sunken foot free. He succeeded. Then,
half-dancing about, he threw himself flat.

His idea was to make a hurried scramble for the bank on hands and knees.
But he uttered a cry of the greatest alarm as his hands went down into the
treacherous mass clear to the wrists.

It took a great effort to get upright again. By the time he had done so,
Jack realized that he was in a most serious and critical situation.

He was sunk now clear to the knees in a weaving, shifting mass. It circled
his imprisoned limbs like great moving ropes, pulling him downward with a
suction force that was tremendous.

The youth uttered a grasp of real horror. He could not budge either limb.
As he sank to the thighs, he gave himself up for lost.

He saw that no help of any kind whatever was at hand. He knew that the
camp of the men who had come with him must be near. He raised his voice to
a desperate pitch.

He let out a series of the most piercing yells. But his heart sank, as
from the neighboring jungle there instantly arose a mocking imitation from
the throats of several parrots.

They drowned out his cries for help. Jack shuddered as the shifting sands
wound about his waist. He drew up his tingling fingers with a shock as the
mass swept them in ominous, warning contact.

"It is the last of me," thought Jack, as tears of despair came to his
eyes. "Jenny and the folks will never know my fate!"

Jack looked up at the dark sky, sick at heart, but trying to resign
himself to the terrible fate that hung over him.

His glance shifted to the tree. He instinctively dodged his head to one
side as he did so. Something spirited was happening there.

The ocelot had got a clutch on the main tree trunk, now. As it let go of
the dangling limb, however, this parted under the strain.

Its small end struck the ground, and it swung out, coming for Jack and
threatened to crush him.

The limb fell with a crash, the big end just reaching the west side of the
ravine. Its centre grazed our hero's shoulder.

"I am saved!" cried Jack.

He threw one arm tightly around the limb, then the other. Now he was
clinging to a natural bridge spanning the ravine from one side to the
other.

Jack held on and tugged hard to draw himself up from this quicksand bath.

It was hard work. Finally he got one limb free, then the other. They were
numb, and felt like pieces of lead.

Jack was so exhausted with the effort that, crawling on top of the limb,
he lay there lengthwise, almost exhausted.




Chapter XXVI

A Night in the Jungle



It was a good quarter of an hour before Jack felt like making another
move. As he lay on the log he kept a lookout for the ocelots, but neither
of the beasts appeared, the larger having gone to the cave-like opening to
learn what was the matter with its mate.

"I must get away from this vicinity," thought our hero, and at last
started off.

He scarcely knew in what direction to turn, for the running away of his
pony and his adventures with the wild beasts and in the quicksands had
completely bewildered him.

"I'd give a good round sum to be back with our party," he thought, as he
pushed his way through the jungle. "I wonder if they are out searching for
me?"

At last he had to rest again, and thinking himself safe for the time being
he set about cleaning his hands and face, and also his outfit.

"This is certainly treasure hunting with a vengeance," he mused. "I think
I would have done better had I stuck to the nitrates. Maybe I'll lose my
life and the vultures will pick my bones, just as they did poor Plum's."

It made our hero more dismal than ever to think of how Plum had departed,
and he was very sober as night drew on and he still found himself alone
and with no idea of where he was.

"I'll have to stay here alone in the dark," he said, half aloud. "That
won't be pleasant, but it can't be helped."

Soon it was so dark that to advance further would have been foolish.

Accordingly Jack came to a halt, and looked around for some means of
making himself comfortable for the night.

He did not deem it wise to remain on the ground, where some wild beast
might leap upon him, and so looked for some wide-spreading tree among
whose branches he might rest in peace.

At length he found a tree to his liking and having taken a final look
around, ascended to a number of the upper branches.

Here there was a sort of natural platform, where he might lie without much
danger of falling to the ground.

It was now pitch dark, the clouds obscuring the stars in the heavens. He
was very hungry but had absolutely nothing with which to gratify his
appetite.

"I'll have to get something for breakfast," he reasoned. "If I don't I'll
be likely to starve to death."

It was but natural that Jack should find sleep difficult, and it was a
good two hours before he went off soundly. When he awoke it was with a
start.

Jack listened intently, for he realized that some movement at the foot of
the tree had awakened him. He tried to look downward, but the darkness and
the leaves hid everything from view. He waited with bated breath and soon
heard a faint scratching. That some wild animal was at the foot of the
tree he had no doubt.

"I hope it doesn't try to come up," he thought. "If it does, what am I to
do?"

He did not dare to make a noise, and so remained silently on guard. The
minutes went by slowly, until a good hour had passed. The noises below
continued but that was all.

"Well, even if the beast can't get up it evidently intends to tree me,"
thought Jack, dismally.

Sleep was out of the question, and rather impatiently the youth waited for
the coming of dawn.

At last came a faint light in the east and at last daylight was at hand.

For some time Jack had heard no further noises below him and he fondly
hoped the thing on the ground--whatever it was--had gone away. But now the
noise was repeated, and then came another sound that made him start in
wonder and anticipation.

"Can it be possible!" he murmured, and began to climb down the tree with
all speed. Soon he reached the lower branches, and looking downward saw
his pony resting directly under him!

"Blind luck!" he cried. "And I thought it was a wild beast! How foolish I
was not to come down and take a look!"

Not to scare the pony, Jack called out softly, at which the steed pricked
up its ears. Then our hero slid down the tree to the ground and caught the
pony by the head. It did not offer to run away, but whinnied with evident
satisfaction.

It gave Jack great pleasure to find the pony again, and he felt far less
lonely than he had during the night. He mounted into the saddle, and,
guided by the sun turned in the direction where he thought the mountain
trail might lie.

It was a dull day, a peculiar smoky air filling the jungle.

From a distance came the cry of wild birds, but that was all.

Jack journeyed for a good two hours, and then came to what looked like
another ravine. But the banks were not so steep as before and he had but
little difficulty in going down one side and getting up the other.

"Well, I never!"

This was the cry that burst from his lips half an hour later. A moment
before he had realized that the surroundings looked familiar. Now, on the
ground before him, he saw his lost pistol, shining among the grass and
leaves.

He lost no time in securing the weapon. It was ready for use and with
great satisfaction he placed it in his pocket.

"Now I've got something with which to defend myself," he reasoned. "It may
not be as good as a gun, but it is better than nothing."

Onward he went once more, stopping once to get some handsful of berries
which he knew were good to eat, and then again for a drink of water for
himself and his steed. He had left his former trail, fearful of going in a
circle once more,--a common experience of those traveling in a dense
forest.

By noon Jack was more than hungry and he decided to shoot something and
cook it for a meal. He kept his eyes open, and when some plump birds came
close, brought down two with ease. Then a fire was lit, and he spitted the
birds and broiled them to his satisfaction. He took his time over the
meal, allowing his pony to graze in the meanwhile. Close at hand was a
spring of cold, mountain water and at this he quenched his thirst, and the
pony did the same.

"There, that makes me feel better," said the youth to himself. "It will
last me until nightfall, and by that time I ought to be able to find the
others of the party, or gain some regular trail which leads to somewhere."

So speaking Jack started to get into the saddle once more. As he did so,
he heard a rustling in the leaves of some bushes behind the spring. The
pony gave a violent snort and gave a side step, which threw our hero to
the ground.

"Whoa there, Firefly!" he called out. "Whoa, I say!"

But instead of quieting down, the pony became more violent and it was
impossible for Jack to hold the steed. The pony broke away and like a
flash whirled around and disappeared once more into the jungle.

Somewhat bewildered, Jack stood up and gazed around him.

"What can this mean?" he asked himself. The next instant he saw the reason
for the pony's extreme fright. A snake had appeared, coming rapidly over
the rocks. It was ten or twelve feet long and as thick as a man's arm. It
was hissing viciously and had its glittering eyes fastened full upon our
hero!




Chapter XXVII

Jack and the Big Snake



It was no wonder that Jack was both startled and alarmed. The snake was
certainly powerful, and the youth knew that many of the reptiles of that
vicinity were poisonous. A sting might mean death, and if the snake should
wind itself about him, he might be strangled until his breath was gone,
never to return.

By instinct more than reason he leaped to one side. At this the snake,
hissing louder than ever, did likewise. Then Jack made a wild leap into
the air, caught a low-hanging tree branch, and hauled himself upward.

For the time being our hero was clear of the snake, but he felt far from
comfortable. He perched himself on the limb and watched the reptile
closely. It whipped this way and that over the ground as if in high anger
over missing its intended prey.

Thus several minutes passed. The snake circled the tree three times and
then began to come up with a quickness that chilled Jack to the bone.
There was no help for it, and pulling his pistol, the youth blazed away at
the snake. The first shot took no effect, but the second hit the reptile
fairly in the body. It whipped around its head for a moment, then came
forward as before.

Jack was as far out on the limb as he could get, and now, as the snake
came forward, he blazed away a third and fourth time. Then he let himself
drop to the ground.

As he did this, the reptile thrashed around wildly in the tree, hitting
one limb after another with its tail. Then it came to the ground in a
heap, writhing horribly in its death agonies. Jack had wounded it fatally,
but the body would continue to move until sundown, if not longer. When the
scare was over the youth found himself bathed in a cold perspiration and
trembling as if with the ague. He realized that he had had a narrow
escape, and thanked providence that the snake was dead.

Jack did not remain in that vicinity long, but set at once to work to find
his pony. Fortunately the animal had not gone far on this occasion and a
call soon brought the steed to the youth's side. Then Jack hopped into the
saddle once more.

"Gracious! what a lot of adventures I am having!" he murmured, as he again
rode along. "I hope I don't have any more."

On and on through the forest rode Jack, gradually gaining higher ground.
The sun was breaking through the smoky air and this did something towards
raising his spirits.

A good two miles covered, and our hero came out in a clearing some
distance above the jungle. Here he could get a tolerable view of the
surrounding country and he looked eagerly for some trace of his party. To
the southward he made out what he took to be the smoke of a camp-fire, but
that was all.

"I may as well turn in that direction," he reasoned. "Where there is a
fire there must be human beings. And as the war is now at an end it isn't
likely that they will harm me."

For some distance the new route was an easy one, but then it became
rougher and rougher, until riding was all but impossible. At some points
he had to dismount and lead the pony. Once both went into a rocky hollow,
Jack barking a shin and the pony skinning a knee.

"I hope this doesn't last very far," thought the youth. The roughness
continued a quarter of a mile, when he came out on a beautiful grassy
plain, at the rear of which he saw a thatched house and a small garden
enclosure containing a score or more of chickens.

As he approached the house an old man came forth to meet him. He viewed
Jack with astonishment, for visitors in that lonely spot were rare. "Where
does the most noble señor come from?" he asked, bowing low.

"I came from the town far below here," answered Jack. "I have lost my
way," and then as well as he was able he described the road he wished to
find.

"The _Americano_ señor is a long distance from that road," said the
native.

"Can you guide me to it?" questioned the youth, eagerly. "I will pay you
well for your services."

At the mention of pay the native showed an increased interest. He was
naturally a lazy fellow, but the promise of a Peruvian half dollar made
him hustle to take Jack on his way. He too had a pony, and soon the pair
set off, across the plateau and then through a sparingly grown forest,
where some of the trees were of enormous height.

"What had made the air so smoky?" questioned Jack, as they rode along.
"Have there been heavy forest fires?"

"No forest fires, señor," the native answered. "The smoke comes from the
bowels of the earth. The rocks have opened once more--we shall soon have
an earthquake."

"You think so?" cried Jack. He had experienced several slight earthquakes
while in that quarter of the globe, and, though they had done small harm,
he dreaded the coming of another quake.

"Yes, señor."

"How soon?"

"Two, three days, it may be--or perhaps a week," answered the native.

After that they rode along in silence for fully half a mile, when they
reached a trail running east and west.

"Is this the road the señor is looking for?" asked the native, bringing
his pony to a halt.

"I believe it is," answered Jack. "But I must look around first to see if
my party has passed this way."

He surveyed the scene with care, but could find no trace of the others.
Had they come thus far, or had they turned back, in a hunt for him? Jack
was in a quandary over what to do next. Night was again coming on, and he
had no desire to remain alone again, after his many adventures of the past
twenty-four hours.

"Where can we stop around here?" he asked.

"The señor wants his humble servant to remain with him over night?"

"Yes, unless some other house is handy, and others there."

"There is a house not far away, but it is empty."

"Then let us go to it. It will be better to remain there than to stay in
the open."

They went up the trail a short distance, and then turned to the southward
and took to a side road leading through a patch of high brushwood.
Crossing a tiny mountain torrent, they came in sight of a dilapidated
house, one end of which was all but wrecked. To the surprise of both Jack
and his guide, smoke was issuing from behind the structure.

"Somebody must be here after all," said the youth, as he rode forward.

"It must be a stranger, señor," was the native's reply.

Not to fall into the hands of enemies Jack advanced with caution. As he
rounded the end of the dilapidated house, he saw a bright fire burning
among some piled-up stones. In front of this fire a tall young man,
dressed in rags, was crouching, cooking something in a battered pan. As
Jack came closer the young man suddenly leaped to his feet, uttering a cry
of alarm. Then he gave another cry, and dropping the pan with its contents
to the ground, he rushed forward with wide-stretched arms yelling at the
top of his voice.

"Jack! Jack! It is really my own Jack! Oh, how glad I am to see yeou!"




Chapter XXVIII

Back from the Dead



Jack literally fell from his horse. Was he dreaming or was this a ghost
that confronted him? He gazed at the other fellow with eyes that almost
popped from his head.

"Ain't yeou glad to see me?" came from the fellow in rags, and his voice
took on a hurt tone. "Plum! Is it--is it really you?" faltered Jack.

"Sure ez yeou air born it's me," was the answer from Plum Plucky.

"But I thought you were dead--I was sure you were dead. Why, I--I buried
your bones!"

"Not by a jugful yeou didn't bury my bones, Jack. I've got 'em all with
me, although I allow they ain't much meat on 'em jest now," went on Plum,
dolefully.

"But this--this staggers me! I was certain you were dead, and when I found
a heap of bones which the vultures had picked clean I buried them for
yours. This is the most wonderful thing I ever heard of. I can't
understand it. Where have you been, and why didn't you let me hear from
you?"

"I have been a prisoner of war," answered Plum. "Got caught in the
mountains one day. Fust they was up fer shootin' me, but then they changed
their minds and carted me off to some little town in the mountains. They
fired me into a dungeon an' I took sick, an' would have died only a native
gal up an' nussed me back to health. Then I give the gal some silver I had
hidden away an' she showed me how to git away, an' I got. Then I got lost
in the mountains, an' would have starved to death only I run down some
sort o' a wild beast that had two legs broken in a fall over the rocks. I
killed the beast--I reckon it was a puma--with some rocks, an' lived on
the meat fer nigh on to a week. Then, after all kinds o' adventures in the
mountains, I reached here, an' here I am, an' so happy to see yeou I don't
know what to do."

As he finished tears stood in the honest eyes of the Yankee lad, and Jack
was no less affected. They embraced, the native looking on in wonder,
until the matter was explained to him.

"I know this road like a book, so ye won't need thet native no longer,"
said Plum. "But I'd like to have his nag. I'm dead tired o' hoofin' it."

"You shall have the pony--if he will sell," said Jack.

"Got any money to pay with? I ain't got a red cent."

Jack had some funds with him, and soon a bargain was closed with the
native. Then the fellow went off, leaving the former chums to themselves.

The supper Plum had been cooking was spoilt, but another was presently
prepared and both sat down to do justice to the repast. As they ate each
told his story in detail, and Jack related his reason for coming back to
that portion of the country.

"I'm glad to learn yeou made money on them nitrates," said Plum. "An' I am
glad, too, thet you found yer gal true blue an' waitin' for ye, Jack. But
about this treasure hunt,--well, I don't put much stock in it."

"I want to solve the mystery of that boiling lake, Plum. Even if I don't
get the treasure it will be something to learn what makes that water shoot
up as it does."

"Oh, I suppose so, but don't yeou take too many risks finding eout,"
returned the Yankee lad.

Plum said he had expected to remain at the deserted house all night and
then push on for the seacoast. But now he had met Jack, and had a pony at
his service, he was willing to go anywhere.

"I ain't got no home nor nuthin'," he remarked. "One place is ez good ez
another to me,--only I like to be among friends."

"Stay with me, Plum, and welcome," said Jack, cordially. "I can use you in
my business, if you want to come in."

"I am with yeou every time," said Plum, and shook hands on it. As said
before, he was without funds and more than glad that our hero was willing
to assist him.

The night was spent at the dilapidated house without anything unusual
happening, and early in the morning they got breakfast,--eating some birds
Jack brought down with his pistol--and then went on their journey.

Noon found them on the main road, and an hour later they came across two
of the members of Jack's party.

"Well, I am glad to see you are alive," said one of the men. "We had about
given you up for lost."

"I came pretty near being lost forever," answered Jack, and once again had
to tell his story. Then one of the men was despatched to bring up the rest
of the party; and by nightfall all hands were together again.

"I shall certainly be more careful in the future," declared Jack. "Such
absent-mindedness does not pay."

Fortunately some extra clothing had been brought along, and a suit was
given to Plum, for which he was exceedingly thankful. That night Jack
slept finely, and in the morning declared himself in the best of health.

Once again the party moved forward to the rocky bowl in the mountains
holding the Devil's Waters. By noon the summit of the ascent was gained
and the party came to a halt. Then Jack went ahead accompanied only by
Plum.

As soon as Jack reached a spot where he could look into the vast bowl he
saw that something unusual had occurred. He was mystified and appalled and
sat on his pony spellbound.

The roar and thunder of the mysterious boiling lake was gone. Not a sound
broke the stillness of the mountainous scene. He looked down on a
grass-covered valley, somewhat round, in size and having in its center a
mound or "island," upon which grew a lonely pimento tree. A branch of the
tree, devoid of foliage, pointed like a great finger, to a cut in the
great mountain bowl.

There was no mistaking such a landmark, and as Jack viewed it he gave a
long low whistle.

"Well?" demanded Plum, questioningly.

"I am--am staggered, Plum."

"Why?"

"This doesn't look like a lake, does it?"

"Sure not, Jack."

"Well, the last time I was here it was a boiling, writhing lake, and that
mound you see yonder was an island in the middle."

"Gosh all hemlock, Jack! Yeou don't mean it!"

"I assuredly do."

"There ain't a drop o' water around here neow!"

"I know it and that is what puzzles me."

"Ain't mistaken in the spot?"

"Not at all. Do you see that solitary pimento tree? Well, that was there,
exactly as it is now."

"Yeou said it would be, I remember that," said Plum, scratching his head.
"But this ain't no lake."

"It has been. See, the grass shows signs of having been covered with water
mixed with mud."

"That is so too, an' neow I look at it, Jack, ther's big holes in the
ground here an' there, where the water must have run off."

For several minutes Jack and his friend surveyed the scene. Then our hero
urged his pony down the somewhat steep side of the gigantic mountain bowl.

"Whar be yeou a going now?" asked Plum.

"To the mound in the middle of the valley, to see if I can find the
treasure," shouted back Jack.

"All right, I'm with yeou," answered the Yankee lad, and followed down the
slope.




Chapter XXIX

The Treasure of the Boiling Lake



It must be owned that Jack's heart beat rather rapidly as he rode down
into the little valley, hemmed in on all sides by the high walls of the
Andes mountains.

He remembered well what the paper had said concerning the treasure, yet he
did his best to steel himself against possible disappointment.

Plum Deemed to read his thoughts, for as he rode up he said:

"Jack, thet treasure might have been here years ago, but don't be
disapp'inted if it's gone now. Them waters may have washed it away."

"I am willing to take what comes, Plum," was the answer. "But I want to
know the exact truth--I hate to be kept in suspense."

"Well, we'll know afore long, I calkerlate," returned the Yankee lad.

They had to pick their way with care to the "island," as Jack insisted
upon calling it. The bed of the valley was filled with holes and cuts, all
of unknown depth. Here and there the flat rocks were split in twain in the
most extraordinary fashion.

"There has been some great convulsion of nature here," said Jack. "Maybe
the earthquakes have something to do with the disappearance of the water."

"If the water was here--an' I believe what you say--it must have gone down
in 'em holes and cuts," said Plum. "But what made it spout up ag'in?"

"Some contraction of the hollows under the lake's surface," answered Jack.
"Maybe a cave would get filled with water, then some rocks would fill the
cave up, causing the water to spout out into the valley."

"It must be thet--but it is certainly wonderful, Jack."

At last the pair reached the side of the mound or "island," Here they
could gain a good idea of the big pimento tree with its stricken branch
pointing to the distant hills. Around the pimento the rocks were strewn in
all directions.

"If there was a cave here it is filled up," said Jack.

"Pity we didn't bring a spade along," answered his companion.

Dismounting, they tied their ponies to the pimento and then began to look
around the mound, which was several acres in extent. Rocks were cast up in
all directions, as if by the force of a volcano.

A half hour had passed, and they had found nothing of value, when of a
sudden Plum snatched up something and gave a yell:

"Gold! gold!"

"True enough," answered Jack, when he had examined the piece. It was the
size of his little finger and similarly formed.

"The treasure must be here!" went on the Yankee lad. "Come, let us look
for it."

"That is what we are doing already," answered Jack, with something of a
happy laugh. He, too, had spotted something yellow between the rocks, and
now brought it forth, another piece of gold, twice the size of Plum's
find.

"Good for yeou!" shouted the Yankee boy. "The rocks must be full o' gold!"

In feverish haste the search was continued, and soon Jack had at least a
pound of gold to his credit, while Plum had nearly as much. Then, of a
sudden, Jack stepped on some loose dirt and shot out of sight.

"Hi! what yeou doing?" yelled Plum, in alarm, as he retreated from the
hole that had appeared.

"Help me out!" called up Jack. He had gone down about a dozen feet, to
bring up in a bed of sand and small stones.

"Hurt any?" queried Plum anxiously.

"Not a bit, Plum."

"Any gold down there?"

"I'll see," said Jack.

He hunted around the opening and soon discovered a passageway between two
immense rocks. He lit a match and one look around made his eyes open
wildly.

Gold was there, on all sides of the passageway--enough to make him rich
for life!

"Plum, look here!" he yelled. "Gold--all you want of it!"

"Du tell!" roared the Yankee boy, and without stopping to think twice he
dropped down to the bottom of the hole.

Another match was lit, and then some dry brushwood, and by the flickering
light the two youths filled their pockets with the precious metal.

"We can load our ponies with gold," said Jack. He was so delighted he
could scarcely speak.

"That's it--we'll carry away all we can an' then come back fer more,"
answered the Yankee lad.

How to get to the top of the hole once more was a problem, but at last
Jack climbed on Plum's shoulders. He was then able to grasp a tree root,
and by this means hauled himself upward.

"I'll tell you what to do, Plum!" he called down. "You throw up the gold
to me and I'll load it on the ponies."

"All right, Jack. But don't forgit to pay me fer the job," laughed Plum.

"Pay you? Why, Plum, a good share of this gold is yours!"

"Yes, but yeou knew about the treasure, I didn't."

"I don't care. You can have a third anyway--and I'll pay all expenses of
this trip."

"Thanks, Jack, yeou allers was a good feller."

After that both boys worked away like Trojans for the best part of an
hour. The gold was there and Plum flung up one piece after another, until
the saddle bags on both ponies were overflowing.

"We've got a load!" cried Jack at last. "Any more down there?"

"Plenty," was the answer.

"Well, let us take this to yonder hills and hide it. Then we can come back
for more."

"Why to the hills, Jack?"

"Because something tells me not to trust this spot too long, Plum.
Remember the boiling lake."

He assisted the Yankee lad to the top of the opening and then, mounted on
their ponies, they made their way over the dry bottom of the lake to the
rocky ridge beyond. Here they deposited the gold in a safe place, and then
returned to the "island."

"I'll go down this time," said Jack, and did so. A torch had been brought
along, and sticking it in a crack of the rocks, the youth went to work
with a will.

In less than half an hour the ponies were again loaded with gold. Jack had
picked up almost the last piece in sight when he came to a sudden pause in
his work.

What was that strange sound, and was it possible the earth beneath him was
trembling? He leaped back to the center of the hole. Yes, the earth was
surely quaking, and now some loose dirt came down on top of him.

"It is the earthquake!" he murmured, and at that moment came a loud cry
from Plum.

"Jack! Jack! come up, as quick as yeou can! The water is squirting up
through 'em holes, an' the lake is filling up!"




Chapter XXX

A Ride for Life--Conclusion



The earthquake was indeed upon them, and as Plum threw down a rope to Jack
the whole landscape seemed to rock to and fro, causing the Yankee lad to
miss his footing and pitch headlong on our hero's head.

"Oh, Jack, did I hurt you?" spluttered Plum, as he stood upright at the
bottom of the hole.

Jack did not answer, for at that instant the earth shook again, sending
them both on their backs. Then all became, for the instant, quiet.

"We must get away from this spot!" gasped Jack. "If we don't, we'll be
buried alive!"

The rope had fallen at his feet. He picked it up. There was a noose at one
end and this he whirled upward.

Twice he missed the object for which he aimed, but the third time the rope
caught fast to a projecting rock.

"Now, Plum, up you go!" he said, and gave his companion a lift. Fear lent
the Yankee lad strength and he went up hand over hand in rapid fashion.
Jack followed, and in a moment more both stood on the surface of the
island.

The sight that met their gaze was enough to make them shudder. On all
sides the darkish-green water was spouting from the holes and cuts in the
lake bed. Some of the columns arose to a height of a hundred feet, the
water falling back into the basin with a tremendous report, and causing
the drops to fly in all directions. At one point in the lake the water was
already a foot or more deep.

"To the shore!" yelled Jack, and flew for a pony, while Plum did likewise.
The animals were crazy with fear and could scarcely be controlled.

As they left the island there came another movement of the earthquake,
followed by a crash behind them. They looked back, to see the lonely
pimento tree fall into the very hole they had just left!

"Gosh! what a narrer escape!" gasped Plum.

"We are not out of it yet, Plum," answered Jack. "Come, we must ride for
all we are worth. Perhaps we had better throw away the gold."

"No! no! Don't do it!" screamed the Yankee lad. "We can make the shore if
we hurry."

Down they plunged side by side from the island and into the water that was
now flowing in all directions around the mound. They made a bee line for
the rocky ridge beyond.

"Look out for holes!" cried Jack, but even as he spoke his pony plunged
downward, nearly causing our hero to take a header. But he clung fast,
and, struggling up, the pony went forward as before.

It was a ride that can scarcely be described. Soon the water was up to the
bodies of the ponies and then they were carried off their feet. They swam
a short distance, and then, coming to a shallow spot, galloped on as
before.

It was a wild ride, and dripping from foam and water the ponies kept on
until once again they had to swim.

Then came a roar from the bottom of the lake, and steeds and riders were
hurled high in the air, to fall again with a noise in the spume of the
boiling lake.

"We--we air lost!" panted Plum. "Th--the wind is gone out o' me!"

"Keep on, we have only a short distance further to go!" cried Jack.

The earth was shaking again and the water appeared to swing away from them
toward the island.

Then it came on with a rush, carrying ponies and riders far up the rocky
ridge. Then the water went back as before, boiling and foaming furiously,
while a mist blotted out the immediate landscape.

"Come, don't stop here!" yelled Jack, urging his pony forward. "To higher
ground, before it is too late!"

Again they went on, but not for far. Another earthquake threw them flat
and Plum rolled down under his pony. Then the quaking ceased; and that was
the last of the earthquake.  Arising, Jack helped his companion and found
that the Yankee youth was uninjured. Both looked down the rocks toward the
lake. The water was boiling and foaming as before, but gradually the
surface of the lake grew calm. Then Jack gave another exclamation:

"The island! It is sinking from sight!"

It was true, the island was going down slowly but surely. In a few minutes
it was but a mere speck on the surface, and then even this disappeared.

"Gone!" gasped Plum. "But we got the gold--or a good part o' it!"

"Thank heaven that our lives were spared!" murmured Jack. "I never want to
go through another such experience--not for all the gold in the world!"

*       *       *       *       *

A few words more and we will bring our tale to a close.

When they had rested, Jack and Plum rejoined the others of the party. The
story of the hunt for gold was told, much to the amazement of the rest,
and, later, the gold was taken down to the seacoast and placed with some
reliable bankers. The boiling lake was inspected and found to be deeper
than ever. Strange to say, the lake remained where it was for about two
months, when it gradually disappeared, and that was the last seen of it.
The ground around where the pimento island had been was greatly upheaved,
and a long search in that vicinity failed to bring any more gold to light.

The treasure that had been found proved to be worth nearly thirty thousand
dollars, one-third of which went to Plum and the rest to Jack. Out of his
share our hero paid all the expenses of the trip and also rewarded
handsomely all those who had accompanied him into the mountains.

With a portion of his money Jack continued to develop his nitrate fields
and shipped vast quantities of the stuff to this country and elsewhere. He
soon became immensely wealthy, and then settled down with his wife, Jenny,
in Boston, where we will bid him farewell.



The End.










End of Project Gutenberg's Jack North's Treasure Hunt, by Roy Rockwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK NORTH'S TREASURE HUNT ***

***** This file should be named 7847-8.txt or 7847-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/8/4/7847/

Produced by Curtis A. Weyant and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
